Hawthorn completes stunning upset over Fremantle in Perth qualifying final to secure home prelim
Hawthorn will host an MCG preliminary final after an upset 32-point win over minor premier Fremantle in Perth.
The Hawks were methodical and ruthless in their ambush of the minor premiers, who were rendered toothless as Hawthorn completed a 10.12 (72) to 5.10 (40) win.
Fremantle, clearly the dominant side throughout the home and away season, froze under the bright lights as many key players had poor games in the face of manic Hawthorn pressure.
The Hawks will now enjoy a week off before hosting a preliminary final at the MCG, while the Dockers will face either Geelong or Carlton in Perth in a bid to avoid a shock straight sets exit.
Follow the live blog below, keep up to date with all the latest stats in our ScoreCentre, and tune in to our live radio coverage.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
AFL Qualifying Final Scoreboard
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
That's where we'll leave it
That's all we have for you tonight.
It was a fierce final of footy, but when it came down to the team with the answers, it was the same one every time - and it wasn't the minor premiers.
It's not over, but Fremantle's season is on the brink. In four quarters of football they have thrown away their hard-earned advantage, and the road to the grand final no longer goes through the west.
Hawthorn will have to be close to favourites now, with a hugely significant win, a week off, and a wait to find out their opponents in a prelim final.
We will be back tomorrow night when we will find out who Fremantle's next opponent will be, as Geelong and Carlton meet at the MCG in the first Elimination Final.
Join us again then, but for now this is Andrew McGarry, on behalf of Dean Bilton, thanking you for reading along with us, and wishing you a very good night.
Key Event
Hawks coach Sam Mitchell says James Sicily and Jai Newcombe had the "important moments" in win over Dockers
Sam Mitchell has spoken to Channel Seven after the game and he was naturally happy with his team's response whenever challenged and some incredible efforts from key players.
"They (Fremantle) tried to get through the corridor a lot and we just were able to force enough errors. And when you force the errors, it gives you opportunity," the Hawthorn coach said.
"You know that they're (Freo) a second half team. You know that they're going to be driven. And so every time they got a goal, we managed to get the next one.
"And that's so important when you play interstate and when you play here against, you know, the purple crowd was pretty significant. And I thought the boys handled it really well."
The Hawks coach was delighted with the brilliant game from Hawthorn skipper James Sicily and co-captain Jai Newcombe.
"He's the captain of the club. So we spend a fair bit of time together. And I thought him and Jai (Newcombe) as the two captains, they just stood up and they just in big moments ...
"Statistically, I don't know how good they were, but I just thought they had real important moments of the game where they produced what matters.
"And that's what wins, not necessarily what hits a score sheet or a stat sheet. And I, I was just so proud of them."
Key Event
'It wasn't us': Coach Justin Longmuir says Dockers inefficiency and Hawks pressure made the difference
A subdued but calm Justin Longmuir has faced reporters after a bad loss for the Dockers.
He pointed to the Hawks' pressure, and the turnovers that killed Freo.
"We had 20 back half turnovers in the first half - normally we keep sides to that in a game," he said.
"That's where the damage was done."
On the attacking side, he was frustrated with the flood of inside 50s (57 to Hawthorn's 51) that only resulted in five goals for the game.
"It's not us," he said.
The questions turned into the pressure on the Dockers not to go out in straight sets after such a huge season.
"We've got to lean into each other as a group, and find our best footy for next week," he said.
"We're not dead and buried."
Match report: Wizard dazzles as Hawks stun Dockers in Perth boilover
The Hawks kicked six goals to one in a dominant first half in Thursday night's clash to set up the 10.12 (72) to 5.10 (40) win and secure a home preliminary final.
Fremantle, who had been a perfect 12-0 at Perth Stadium this season, will now confront either Carlton or Geelong in a cut-throat semi-final in Perth next week.
The Dockers were a dominant force during the home-and-away season, stringing together a 14-game winning streak at one stage on the way to a league-best 19-4 record.
But the minor premiers looked overawed in the finals cauldron on Thursday night in front of 59,446 fans - Fremantle's largest ever home crowd.
Fremantle's first-half return of 1.4 (10) was their lowest such score in a final, even worse than the 1.6 (12) they kicked across the opening two quarters of their 2013 grand final loss to the Hawks.
The Dockers will now have to win their semi-final and then an away preliminary final in order to make their first grand final since 2013.
Sicily, Tom Barrass and Josh Battle were rocks in defence, keeping Jye Amiss, Josh Treacy and Patrick Voss to two goals and 19 disposals between the three of them.
Treacy's first kick of the game - a set-shot goal - only arrived with five minutes remaining in the match.
Hawks veteran Jack Gunston kicked two clutch goals in the first-half onslaught, while Dylan Moore chipped in with two majors.
Watson was a human highlights reel at times on the way to two goals from 19 disposals.
"The belief in the group's outstanding," Watson told Fox Sports after the match.
"We knew it was going to be hot. It was hot early, but the boys stood up well."
Fremantle ruckman Luke Jackson kicked the opening goal of the match, but the rest of the first half belonged to Hawthorn as their slick ball movement and fierce tackling left the Dockers looking second-rate at times.
Watson's soccered goal from nearly 20m out sparked a run of four consecutive goals as the Hawks took a surprise 28-9 lead into quarter-time.
Hawthorn's pressure continued to be off the charts in the second term.
And even when Fremantle hit back - like when Karl Worner won a holding-the-ball free kick for his chasing tackle on Max Beattie - the Hawks didn't give up.
When Worner played on and took a bounce from that free kick, Beattie ran hard to put pressure on the kick.
It resulted in a turnover and a running goal to Moore as Hawthorn's lead expanded to 33 points by half-time.
There wasn't anything obvious in the half-time stats to suggest what was going wrong for Fremantle.
But the naked eye could decipher their problem - an inability to handle Hawthorn's intense pressure.
Jordan Clark's high-flying mark on top of Jack Ginnivan was a rare highlight for Fremantle in the first half.
Hawthorn forward Mitch Lewis suffered a huge scare when he hurt his shoulder in a heavy landing, but he was able to return for the start of the second half.
Fremantle broke Hawthorn's run of six goals when Jye Amiss kicked truly one minute into the third quarter.
But luck wasn't on Fremantle's side, with Watson kicking his second to restore the 33-point margin at the final change after his direct opponent Brandon Walker had rolled his ankle in the previous play.
Watson put the icing on the cake early in the final quarter when he gathered the ball at full pace on the wing, handballed to himself while under pressure from Luke Ryan, before regathering to kick it to Harry Morrison for the sealing goal.
AAP
Dockers skipper Alex Pearce says the game wasn't a reflection of their year
Fremantle captain Alex Pearce has spoken to Channel Seven after the game.
He praised Hawthorn for "coming out with great intensity".
"There were a few areas we got wrong," he said.
"A lot of our (best) game ... comes out of us being strong, and using our numbers.
"We looked a little rushed out there. Tough to know exactly (what went wrong) at this moment.
"We've got full confidence we can get back to our best footy."
The Hawks roar at Perth Stadium
In the rooms, a jubilant Hawthorn team gather and they roar out the club song.
This one really is a gamechanger, not sure if it's fully sunk home for them even though they're celebrating loudly.
But the week off to rest the bumps and bruises might give them time to come to terms with it.
Key Event
What's next for Hawthorn and Fremantle
So Sam Mitchell and the Hawks team go straight into a prelim final.
For the Dockers, it's a real nightmare result.
They will hold their second home final, but instead of a prelim in a fortnight, it will be a cut-throat semifinal in a week's time against Geelong or Carlton.
Key Event
"Lucky we stood up": Nick Watson happy after Hawks vital win
Nick Watson didn't have a huge night numbers-wise, but he was deadly when he had it.
He's been speaking to Fox Footy after the game.
"I'm so glad for the boys!," he said.
"Coming into a hostile environment, it was a bit slippery out there. Lucky we stood up!"
Watson praised the backline, with Tom Barrass, Josh Battle and James Sicily all having blinders.
Asked what was next with a week off, he replied:
"I don't know, we'll probably find out after this - but probably kick the legs up tonight and then watch the other games (this weekend).
Key Event
FT: Hawthorn 10.12 (72) beats Fremantle 5.10 (40)
It's Hawkie Time in Perth! They win by 32 points.
The Dockers' unbeaten run at home ends - and ends in a big way!
They never really threw a punch, to use a boxing analogy.
The Hawks controlled this game from early on, with brilliant defence (well done, James Sicily) and solid attack.
Where now for Fremantle? This is a really worrying loss for the minor premiers, and the result upends the finals series after the first qualifying final.
A huge night for Sam Mitchell and the Hawks - and a pretty rotten one for the 59,456 mostly Dockers fans at Perth Stadium.
Josh Treacy kicks a consolation goal
TThe Dockers get one back through Josh Treacy, but it's been a rough night for him and all his teammates.
The lead is still five goals with five to go.
And Jordan Clark is in all sorts after being flattened in a contest.
Ginnivan kicks a valuable behind
Hawthorn just has this one ... and the same names are popping up.
They hit up Nick Watson on the wing, he's too far out, but he goes down the line to Jack Ginnivan whose made a huge run across field to take it.
His kick from the pocket goes wide, but it's a behind. That's 37 points, seven scores and we're entering time on.
Jye Amiss kicks out on the full
Another chance for Freo, and Jye Amiss gets a mark in the left forward pocket.
It's deep near the boundary, not an easy shot. Amiss goes back and kicks it, it drifts ... and drifts, and goes out on the full in the opposite pocket. It's a 36-point game halfway through the final term.
Miss from Dudley, and coach Longmuir looks ... resigned
The Dockers are still trying, and they surge the ball forward.
But it's just the missed targets which have killed them all night.
They miss Luke Jackson, who regathers and handballs back to isaiah Dudley, who runs in and ... misses.
That's dispiriting. Justin Longmuir looks about 10 years older in the Freo box.
Key Event
Harry Morrison stuns the crowd with the early goal
That was a thing of beauty - as long as you weren't a Dockers fan.
The Hawks got the ball yet again, Jack Ginnivan dribbled the ball forward to Nick Watson - it cannoned off the Wizard towards the boundary, but then the Hawks star did some sleight of hand to somehow keep it in, and regather.
He surged clear down the wing away from the boundary and sent it to the top of the square where Harry Morrison marked / got a free.
Morrison kicked the goal! And that should really be that. There is still time, but it just looks like Hawks, Hawks, Hawks.
Docker Brandon Walker out of the game
As if they needed more bad news ...
Dockers defender Brandon Walker is out of the game with an ankle injury.
Huge task for Freo
The Dockers are 12-0 in games at Perth Stadium this season.
If they want to make it THIRTEEEEEEEEEN, then they will have to make the biggest final quarter comeback in a VFL/AFL final (the record is 28 points).
3QT stats
- Inside 50s: 44-37 Hawthorn
- Clearances: 25-24 hawthorn
- Centre clearances: 9-4 Hawthorn
- Contested possessions: 110-107 Hawthorn
- Uncontested possessions: 173-144 Fremantle
- Marks inside 50: 8-7 Hawthorn
- Tackles: 48-37 Hawthorn
- Tackles inside 50: 14-7 Hawthorn
Nothing much changed in that quarter, and almost all signs point to the Hawks
Key Event
3QT: Hawthorn 9.10 (64) leads Fremantle 4.6 (31)
A late, late chance for Freo ends up with a dribbled shot from Patrick Voss that's rushed through.
And as the quarter ends, it's like deja vu.
The lead is still 33 points, and the Hawks have this one in hand, barring a miracle.
The Dockers showed something at least in that quarter - but Hawthorn had the answers every time.
And it's that man, Nick Watson for Hawthorn!
What can you say?
Three times the Dockers have made a breakthrough in the third quarter - and three times the Hawks have hit straight back.
James Sicily gets the ball, sends it to Dylan Moore, and Moore hits Nick Watson - and the Wizard does what the Wizard does, and kicks it on the run from 45.
Game. Set. Match?