live
Commonwealth Games live updates: Fastest man and woman to be crowned in 100m, Diamonds take on Malawi
After four consecutive days of brilliance for Australia's Commonwealth Games athletes, there is more to come on day five with the men's and women's 100m semifinals and finals.
The netball is back in action with the Diamonds taking on Malawi in their third group game and Kyle Chalmers will aim for gold in the men's 100m freestyle.
Follow all the action in our live blog.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Tue 28 Jul 2026 at 6:46pm
Weightlifting: Ryven Ewing in action first up
To the Armadillo!
Never thought I'd be writing that in a sport's blog, but here we are...
Anyway, we're hitting the ground running straight away with morning, with Ryven Ewing in action in the men's 88kg weight lifting category.
Lovely story for the UQ student.
Ewing was, in fact, born in Scotland and was raised there until he was 8.
"It'll be so special for people who have been such an important part of my journey to be there and watch," Ewing said told UQ before the Games.
"It feels like I'm bringing two different worlds together."
The 24-year-old, who is studying for a Master of Physiotherapy, used to play rugby but transitioned to weightlifting as a was to improve himself.
"Physiotherapy and weightlifting complement each other really well," he said.
"Both are about understanding how the human body moves, and that knowledge definitely helps me as an athlete and as a clinician.
"Technique is a massive part of weightlifting - sometimes I wish it was just brute strength, but there are lots of small technical details that can help you make much better use of your strength.
"For me, weightlifting is less about beating other people and more about trying to be better than I was.
"If I can improve on my own performances, I know I'll usually end up in a pretty good position."
Tue 28 Jul 2026 at 6:38pm
Hello everyone
Good day to you all and welcome to the ABC Sport coverage of the fifth day of action from the 2026 Commonwealth Games.
My name is Simon Smale and I am here with Gemma Ferguson on this side of the world, while Jon Healy is over there in Glasgow, enjoying the festival of sport first hand.
I know we're feeling the love and the vicarious thrill of gold on behalf of our amazing competitors so far, so I hope you are too.
Another busy day of action, with swimming and athletics heats this morning, some big 3X3 wheelchair basketball matches, more medal prospects in the gymnastics, a bronze medal bowls contest, a couple of boxing bouts, weightlifting and the netball.
A bit on, as they say.
We'll be here throughout the night and into the morning to guide you through it all.