Malaysia this week deported about 1,500 Myanmar nationals, including children, as part of a refugee repatriation program.
The expulsions came despite objections from the United Nations and scores of human rights groups who say the returnees would face serious danger in the war-torn nation.
Malaysia says the move is necessary to reduce the "financial burden" on the country created by large numbers of asylum seekers.
Amnesty International has expressed concerns the deal could be just the first of many quid pro quo deals between the countries.
A sanctuary no more
Nearly 200,000 refugees and asylum seekers from Myanmar are registered with the UN's refugee agency in Malaysia.
Approximately two-thirds are members of Myanmar's long-persecuted Rohingya minority who were targeted by a military campaign in 2017 that is the subject of a genocide case at the International Court of Justice.
Others include people who fled the civil war triggered by the Myanmar military's 2021 coup.
While the Muslim Rohingya were initially welcomed into Muslim-majority Malaysia, public opinion has turned in recent years.
A wave of online hate speech and misinformation this year has led to harassment and forced the widespread closure of Rohingya schools.
5,000 to be returned
Tuesday's deportation on three Myanmar Navy vessels was the first phase of a broader plan agreed between Malaysia and Myanmar for 5,000 Myanmar nationals to be returned, with more possible in the future.
The ethnic makeup of the cohort has not been revealed.
Myanmar's foreign ministry said last month it was working with countries to facilitate the voluntary return of verified displaced persons in a safe and dignified manner, according to a state media report.
Malaysia's home ministry said the Myanmar asylum seekers issue had "dragged on without a strong solution".
"This lapse has led to a huge financial burden on the country, triggered a serious social crisis and introduced a real security threat in Malaysia," it said.
Voluntary repatriation 'insane'
Malaysia has said the returns are strictly voluntary.
However, the UN refugee agency, UNHCR, said the people returning were taken from immigration detention, which raised concerns about whether they were free to choose to return.
Amnesty International Myanmar researcher Joe Freeman told the ABC's The World ahead of the repatriation his organisation did not believe the returns were voluntary.
"Voluntary repatriation to Myanmar right now would be, for most people but especially Rohingya, insane," Mr Freeman said.
He said those being repatriated would likely be forcibly conscripted into either one of the rebel groups or the Myanmar army.
The UNHCR said no-one should be returned to a country where they may face persecution, torture or other serious threats to their life or freedom.
Political motives
Malaysian Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim's Pakatan Harapan coalition, which recently lost in two state polls, is due to face national elections by February 2028.
Mr Freeman said with the elections looming, the deportations "could be a very easy populist move to secure support".
"Unfortunately, it's going to come at the cost of violating the human rights of thousands of people."
Min Aung Hlaing, who led the coup as head of the Myanmar military and was sworn in as president of the nominally civilian administration this year, is reportedly due to visit Malaysia later this month.
Mr Anwar last month said he would invite Min Aung Hlaing in return for Myanmar taking back Rohingya.
However, Myanmar foreign ministry official Han Win Aung in July told AP repatriation efforts involved "genuine Myanmar citizens" and not Rohingya people, who are denied citizenship in Myanmar.
Myanmar's military-backed government has been seeking to re-engage with the international community since staging elections in December and January that were widely considered a sham and not recognised by ASEAN.
"What we're seeing here could be what I fear [is] the first of many sort of quid pro quos; where the re-engagement comes with something in return," said Mr Freeman.
Myanmar's system not 'perfect'
Mr Anwar has rejected suggestions refugees were being deported without concern for their safety.
"It is easy for them to say: 'Don't send them back.' Where are we going to put these hundreds of thousands?" he told reporters, according to the Malay Mail.
"So now what we want are conditions so that there is safety. That is why we invited them to negotiate," he said of the Myanmar government.
Defending Min Aung Hlaing's visit, he said Myanmar's was not a "perfect system".
"Some people say that ours is not perfect system too. Many countries are not perfect but still being recognised."
ABC/Reuters