Former England cricket captain Ben Stokes will take part in the upcoming Big Bash League season after signing with the Adelaide Strikers, the team has confirmed.
The all-rounder's move had been tipped earlier in the week, but has now been locked in by the Strikers, who said they were looking forward to capitalising on Stokes's "world-class talent" and ability to put in "match-winning performances with both bat and ball".
Stokes retired from international cricket in June, a decision that caused shock waves when it was revealed during a Test match.
His arrival in Adelaide will follow a previous BBL stint, at the Melbourne Renegades in 2015.
"Ben is one of the greatest all-rounders the game has seen, a proven match-winner and a competitor who thrives under pressure," Adelaide head coach Tim Paine said in a statement released by the Strikers.
"We're thrilled to have a player of his ability join our squad."
In the same statement, Stokes said the opportunity to join the Strikers was one he "couldn't pass up".
"Adelaide Oval is an incredible place to play cricket, the Big Bash is a fantastic competition and the Strikers have an exciting group," he said.
"I can't wait to get started, create some special memories with the group and give Strikers fans plenty to cheer about."
Stokes - who made his Test debut in Adelaide in 2013 - will be available for the full BBL summer, the Strikers said.
The hard-hitting, fast-bowling all-rounder captained the England side that was widely expected to challenge Australia for the Ashes in the 2025/26 summer, but was defeated 4-1.
His decision to quit international cricket was revealed shortly before the tea break on day four of the third Test between England and New Zealand at Trent Bridge.
During the series, Stokes made front-page news after being dropped by England for the second Test amid an investigation following a night out with a teammate after the first Test at Lord's.
The 35-year-old is widely recognised as one of the most impactful and talismanic cricketers of the current era, and scored more than 11,000 international runs across T20, ODI and Test formats.
His match-winning performances have included a whirlwind 135 not out against Australia at Headingley in 2019, which steered England to an astonishing one-wicket triumph, and a rearguard 84 not out against New Zealand in the World Cup final the same summer.
His innings of 155 against Australia in a losing cause at Lord's in 2023 occurred in the match made notorious by the controversial run-out of wicketkeeper Jonny Bairstow.