Thu, 3 Sept, 8:10 pm, Final score, Dockers 40, Hawks 72
Brisbane smashes Adelaide by 53 points in AFL semifinal to keep premiership three-peat dream alive
Seven scintillating minutes set the tone as the Brisbane Lions kept their AFL three-peat hopes alive with a 53-point defeat of Adelaide at the Gabba.
Charlie Cameron kicked five goals as the Lions used an outrageous early onslaught to cruise to a 21.18 (144) to 13.13 (91) triumph and will face Hawthorn in a preliminary final next weekend.
Set up by five goals in the game's first seven minutes and 13 seconds - no team has done it faster in an AFL final - it was an emphatic response to last Saturday's Sydney hiding, when they were beaten by the same margin.
Adelaide, who took 19 minutes to kick their first goal, eventually found their feet and surged within 10 points thanks to back-to-back Darcy Fogarty goals among four straight majors in the second term.
Hopes of another Crows surge were quickly extinguished after the main break as a trio of goals, rubber-stamped by a long-range Dayne Zorko effort, blew the margin out to 57 points.
"Extraordinary start," Lions coach Chris Fagan said.
"I never said anything in the first five minutes, was just standing there with my mouth opening, thinking this is unbelievable. We needed to make a statement and thought we did."
Kept quiet by the Swans, Cameron had 4.3 at half-time among nine score involvements, the third-most in the opening half of an AFL final.
It could have been worse for the Crows, with Zac Bailey hitting the post from close range, Harris Andrews and Ryan Lester both missing rare scoring chances after winning 50-metre penalties, and Brisbane generally easing up in the final term.
Bailey (three goals, 23 disposals), days after confirming a monster eight-year extension at Brisbane instead of signing with the Crows, ran free, while Kai Lohmann and Cam Rayner were also heavily involved after being neutralised by the Swans.
The retiring Taylor Walker, in his 318th and final AFL game, grew increasingly frustrated when his leads were ignored.
Coach Matthew Nicks had urged the side at three-quarter time to lift for him one last time and Walker signed off with two smooth drop-punt goals in his final term.
Will Ashcroft collected 30 disposals for the Lions, while Jordan Dawson finished with 30 disposals and eight tackles for the Crows.
Izak Rankine, fresh off 34 touches in the Crows' defeat of the Western Bulldogs, was held to 23 disposals and one behind.
And Hugh McCluggage, in his second game back from a lingering calf injury, looked closer to his best in a two-goal showing that featured plenty of neat touches.
Walker kicked two goals in the last quarter of his career before bidding a tearful goodbye after full-time.
"It gives us an indication of the work we've still got to do, unfortunately," Nicks said.
"It's a deep cut, they're hurting.
"You always believe in yourself, but maybe tonight's a bit of a reality check."
Look back at how the action unfolded in our live blog.
AAP/ABC
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Lions vs Crows scoreboard
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
That's it from the blog tonight
We're going to leave it there tonight, with Brisbane celebrating a comfortable and convincing victory as the Lions punch their ticket to yet another preliminary final.
Two weeks to go then. It's going to be one of Brisbane, Fremantle, Hawthorn or Sydney, that much we know. But not much more than that, it really is right up for grabs now for the four remaining sides. The blog will be back on Friday night for the first preliminary final, and we hope to have your company then. Until then, thanks for joining me this weekend, goodnight.
Match report: Lions respond with thumping semifinal win over Crows
Seven scintillating minutes set the tone as the Brisbane Lions kept their AFL three-peat hopes alive with a 53-point defeat of Adelaide at the Gabba.
The Lions, chasing a third straight premiership, will face Hawthorn in an MCG preliminary final after a rollicking 21.18 (144) to 13.13 (91) Saturday night semi-final triumph.
Set up by five goals in the game's first seven minutes and 13 seconds - no team has done it faster in an AFL final - it was an emphatic response to last Saturday's Sydney hiding, when they were beaten by the same margin.
Adelaide, who took 19 minutes to kick their first goal, eventually found their feet and surged within 10 points thanks to back-to-back Darcy Fogarty goals among four straight majors in the second term.
But just as quickly the Lions sped clear again, Charlie Cameron (5.3) causing carnage as the hosts kicked four more majors in less than nine minutes to finish the half with a 38-point lead.
Hopes of another Crows surge were quickly extinguished after the main break as a trio of goals, rubber-stamped by a long-range Dayne Zorko effort, blew the margin out to 57 points.
Zac Bailey (three goals, 23 disposals), days after confirming a monster eight-year extension at Brisbane instead of signing with the Crows, ran free, while Kai Lohmann and Cam Rayner were also heavily involved after being neutralised by the Swans.
Will Ashcroft collected 30 disposals for the Lions, while Jordan Dawson finished with 30 disposals and eight tackles for the Crows.
AAP
Key Event
The preliminary finals' dates and times are locked in
We're down to the final four. Here's what the biggest weekend of the season will look like:
- Friday night: Sydney vs Fremantle at the SCG, 7:40pm AEST
- Saturday twilight: Hawthorn vs Brisbane at the MCG, 5:15pm AEST
Brisbane's big names deliver
Practically every Lion that was challenged during the week stepped up tonight. It was a very even performance across that Brisbane team, but there were a few standouts:
Zac Bailey: 23 disposals, five tackles, 14 score involvements, 558 metres gained, three goals
Cam Rayner: 22 disposals, four tackles, 551 metres gained, 11 score involvements, two goals
Charlie Cameron: 14 disposals, five goals
Will Ashcroft: 30 disposals, six clearances, 13 score involvements
Key Event
A farewell for Taylor Walker
The Tex tears are flowing as he and his children walk through a guard of honour. The Adelaide champion strides into retirement after 319 games for the Crows.
Key Event
FT: Brisbane 21.18 (144) def Adelaide 13.13 (91)
Some declared this game over after seven minutes. Adelaide's second quarter rendered those predictions incorrect, but only briefly. Brisbane was switched on tonight right from the opening bounce, and always looked like blowing Adelaide away.
So it proved, a nine-goal win probably the least the Lions deserved in a game that allowed them the luxury of taking the foot off the gas late. If it wasn't done seven minutes in, it was at half-time.
Brisbane's greatest tests are still ahead, namely Hawthorn at the MCG in a week's time. Win that and another grand final awaits. Who could possibly count these Lions out?
It's curtains for Adelaide though, the end of a season that brought so many positives but ends at the same juncture as 2025. They need to get better next year to take the next step, but they aren't miles away.
Brisbane's three-peat is still on. Until they are eliminated, perhaps it's best to consider them the favourites.
Alex Neal-Bullen kicks another one for Adelaide
Are there concerns for Brisbane's defence still given they have coughed up 91 points tonight? Probably not, given the game has been dusted since half-time really.
Neal-Bullen stepped through some witch's hats there to convert. Nearly there.
Ben Keays kicks his second for Adelaide
Been a lot of goals in this one. Felt like there were a lot of goals last night too. A couple of very open, high-scoring finals.
Keays crumbed the pack there and goaled easily from 15 metres out. The Brisbane bench is now packed with stars. The siren still three minutes of play away.
Charlie Cameron has five goals for the Lions
One of Tex Walker's boys has his hands over his ears as Country Roads plays again. And honestly? I'm with him. Swerve the goal music.
These are the sort of things we have time to talk about now because we are just biding time until this final ends. Cameron marked Rayner's kick in the pocket and snapped his set shot comfortably. Still three and a half minutes to play.
Taylor Walker has a second goal in the last quarter
Walker's wife and kids are poised and ready on the other side of the fence to join him in the middle for the inevitable guard of honour. They applaud his second goal of the evening, this one a more regulation set shot from 40 out.
The margin is 59 points, which feels like a pretty decent finishing point with four minutes to play.
Levi Ashcroft kicks Brisbane's 20th goal
Chalk up another one. A crafty little dribble from the pocket from Levi for his first of the night.
We've stil got more than seven minutes to play here as the Lions run up a cricket score.
Hugh McCluggage somehow wobbles through another Brisbane goal
That's a couple on the night for McCluggage, who is still slowly working his way back to full strength.
A bit too easy out of a forward 50 stoppage for McCluggage, but the spice has long since gone out of this one. Unless you count Zorko lipping off at Adelaide players as spice.
Taylor Walker with a parting gift! A Crows champ signs off with a beauty
The night couldn't have ended without one more Tex Walker special. It's another thumping roost from Walker, well beyond the 50 metre arc, which fades back perfectly to split the middle.
It comes in front of the pocket of Adelaide fans too. A parting gift from him to them, and another chance for them to show him their affection.
Eric Hipwood responds quickly for Brisbane
Hipwood has been bright tonight, a really encouraging display from the big fella. Feels like they need him at his absolute best if they are to turn two flags into three.
The Ashcroft boys combined out of the middle to set that one up. Both have been excellent, Will especially so.
One more to Riley Thilthorpe's tally
That's the sort of goal you kick in the last quarter of a finals drubbing. The ball just clipping from end to end and ending up with a key forward completely alone in the goalsquare.
Smiles between Thilthorpe and Andrews. Still 13 minutes to play.
Cam Rayner answers straight back for the Lions
He's been unstoppable tonight, Rayner. An absolute beast out there, who has done most of his best work as a provider rather than a finisher.
Not this time. That was a cracking finish on the run on his left foot. And they all sing Sweet Caroline to celebrate.
Wayne Milera kicks a goal for Adelaide
A nice way to end an All Australian season from Milera, pushing forward from defence to slot one from 45 out.
The Crows are still having a dip, asking some questions of the Lions as they traverse this final quarter. Back to a 53-point game.
Key Event
3QT: Brisbane 16.15 (111) leads Adelaide 7.9 (51)
It is an absolute belting now unfortunately, as we have long feared it would be. Brisbane is cruising in second gear but still increasing its gap over Adelaide, which has now stretched out to 10 goals.
The Lions will now be looking to strike the balance towards getting to the finish line without alarm, while keeping a few key players in cotton wool for a prelim final against Hawthorn next week. For Adelaide, there's a bit of pride to play for here in Taylor Walker's last game, but the offseason looms large.
It's another one for Zac Bailey and Brisbane
There's a bit if a stink off the play after Bailey is awarded a high-contact free kick, but I think everyone left it alone before somebody did something silly.
Bailey meanwhile has three goals as the Lions raise the bat. Hundred up.