The Chinese Embassy has rejected a report by New Zealand's top spy agency that includes what it says are multiple "false allegations against China".
In its fourth Security Threat Environment report released on Thursday, the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service said China was the sole nation pursuing espionage in New Zealand "at scale".
The report also said China remained the "most active" nation among several others involved in foreign interference in New Zealand.
In a statement today, the Chinese Embassy said the NZSIS report included baseless and fabricated accusations.
"Its false allegations against China either smear normal exchanges and cooperation as so-called espionage or interference, or are entirely groundless and fabricated out of thin air," the statement said.
"We firmly oppose this and will never accept it."
The embassy said the China-New Zealand relationship was one of mutual benefit, with progress in recent years in areas such as trade, people-to-people exchanges, tourism and international education.
It said the Chinese community in New Zealand had played a positive role in this process.
Since China implemented a unilateral visa-free policy for New Zealanders, a growing number of New Zealanders have visited China, and goodwill towards China, as well as support for China-New Zealand relations, has continued to grow, the embassy said.
"That this report is released at this particular juncture is no coincidence - it forms part of a new wave of attacks, slander and vilification against China orchestrated by certain international forces, and may well itself be a product of foreign interference," the statement said.
It claimed "anti-China forces" were seeking to drive a wedge between the people of both countries, creating a chilling effect on the public, undermining mutual trust and obstructing the growth of the relationship.
"Our message to those forces and individuals attempting political machinations is this: do not sacrifice the hard-won, mutually beneficial China-New Zealand relationship for selfish gain, and do not act against the interests of New Zealand and its people," the embassy said.
"Serving as a pawn for anti-China forces will ultimately backfire.
"Manufacturing distractions in foreign relations will not solve New Zealand's own problems - it will only prove counterproductive.
"We urge these forces and individuals not to quench their thirst with poison, and not to lift a rock only to drop it on their own feet."
The embassy also said China valued its relationship with New Zealand and stood ready to work with New Zealand to advance exchanges and cooperation for the benefit of both peoples.
This story was first published on rnz.co.nz