In short:
A royal commission witness has had a tense exchange with Commissioner Virginia Bell after questioning Israel's right to exist.
Sydney researcher Rita Jabri Markwell has told the commission into antisemitism Israel was not "a legitimate state".
Ms Markwell was also quizzed over her views that Zionism was a form of violent extremism after being called to give evidence on a framework she developed to address hate speech.
A witness at the royal commission on antisemitism has questioned the legitimacy of Israel's existence, following a tense exchange over her interpretation of Zionism as a violent extremist belief.
Rita Jabri Markwell is a Sydney-based solicitor, researcher and policy adviser to the Australian Muslim Advocacy Network and on Thursday gave evidence at the Royal Commission on Antisemitism and Social Cohesion about a framework she helped develop to identify and address all forms of hate speech.
The dehumanisation framework was initially developed to assist with legal proceedings, with Ms Markwell saying the model could also help institutions manage complaints.
Under the model, speech directed at governments, militaries and political ideologies would be protected, but dehumanising speech targeting people based on characteristics such as race, religion or ethnicity would breach the framework.
Following a lengthy and at times emotive cross-examination about the framework, Commissioner Virginia Bell AC SC asked Ms Markwell if she would "accept that there is a legitimacy to the existence of the state of Israel" at the time of the United Nations General Assembly's recognition of the state of Israel in 1948.
"I don't think I have a view particularly on the time of that declaration, but I know that if you were to ask me now whether I think that the state has legitimacy I, as a human rights lawyer, I don't think that any state that relies unlawful occupation and apartheid and genocide could be said to be a legitimate state," Ms Markwell said in response.
"I think that there really needs to be, and this is just a political opinion, but I think there needs to be serious thought as to how we fulfil every human's human rights in that region."
In September 2025, a Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory by the UN Human Rights Council found that genocide was occurring in Gaza.
The allegation of genocide is rejected by Israel
It followed a tense cross-examination by counsel representing various Jewish organisations Nicholas Bender SC, who took Ms Markwell to a Substack post she made about her interpretation of Zionism.
Zionism as defined by the anti-defamation league is a movement for self-determination and statehood for the Jewish people in their ancestral homeland of Israel.
But critics argue that it has contributed to the displacement and denial of rights for Palestinians.
Mr Bender put to Ms Markwell that her Substack post reflected a view she held that Zionism was a form of violent extremism.
"Yes, I do agree. There is a basis for that which is based in research," Ms Markwell said in response.
"The reason I believe that is because there is dehumanisation of outgroups which runs through Zionism which by my work with the University of Queensland ... that is a defining attribute of violent extremist movements, that they tend to rely on dehumanisation which is a form of psychological violence."
Mr Bender at times spoke over Ms Markwell, putting to her that her interpretation of Zionism would mean she thought all Zionists were violent extremists.
Ms Markwell rejected his suggestion.
She was also taken to an article by university student and previous commission witness, Mia Kline, who claimed she had been kicked out of her university accommodation because she was a Zionist.
The commission heard that in her article Ms Kline said she supported a two-state solution, believed in peace and harmony, supported the rights of Palestinians and was often critical of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and the Israel Defense Forces.
Mr Bender asked Ms Markwell for her response to Ms Kline's article.
"When I read her piece, I was quite moved that she was speaking about values to do with peace and coexistence and dignity ... these are all values I also align with," Ms Markwell said.
"But at the same time she was talking about Zionism ... and I found that quite difficult because when I consider zionism as the Jewish nationalist ideology .... Which lead to the creation of the state of Israel in Palestine in very violent circumstances ... all of that doesn't seem to be consistent with the positive values she was talking about.
"I am genuinely interested in how you reconcile the values you speak about with being Zionist because ... I haven't yet heard a Zionist explain to me how do they incorporate Palestinian human dignity and human rights into their ideological framework."