It was a first for the FIFA World Cup: a half-time show, introduced in 2026, with a line-up of global superstars that included Madonna, Justin Bieber, Shakira, Burna Boy and BTS.
Australian singer-songwriter Emmanuel Kelly, who rose to fame with his performances on The X Factor, was also in the mix.
Some enthusiastically welcomed the show, but it had football tragics, who aren't used to such a spectacle during "the beautiful game", collectively pulling out their red cards.
Former Manchester United and England legend Wayne Rooney, who is widely celebrated as one of the greatest players of his generation, even offered a brief but brutal assessment live on the BBC.
"I like a lot of them artists, but I thought it was crap,"Rooney said.
"It just didn't get me going and I wanted the football to come back on ... I like Burna Boy, I like Bieber, I like Shakira, but that was too flat."
Ouch.
But this article is for the pop culture-types.
Here are some key takeaways from the inaugural 2026 FIFA World Cup half-time show, which took place at the temporarily renamed New York New Jersey stadium.
Madonna ... Ronaldo and Ronaldinho
Madonna kicked things off with her track Music from her 2000 album of the same name.
The song, with the refrain: "music makes the people come together", had a twist to it, infused with elements of Disco Inferno, which was made famous by The Trammps in 1976, and was the centrepiece of the 1977 Saturday Night Fever soundtrack.
The mashup also included elements of the song Danceteria from Madonna's chart-topping new album Confessions II.
The Queen of Pop made her entrance in a dune buggy driven by surprise guests, Brazilian football legends Ronaldo and Ronaldinho.
BTS truncated but flawless
K-pop superstars BTS were decked out in leather, and their dance moves came with the kind of kicks that certainly weren't out of place on a football pitch.
They performed their global hit Dynamite in a performance that felt too brief.
But that's because the entire halftime show had an 11-minute time limit, exceeding this by only about 30 seconds.
Justin Bieber introduced by Ted Lasso
Actors Jason Sudeikis and Brendan Hunt, in character as Ted Lasso and Coach Beard respectively, made a surprise appearance to introduce Justin Bieber.
Bieber lowered the energy considerably by launching into Everything Hallelujah from his 2025 album Swag II.
The acoustic performance had Bieber strumming a guitar.
The minimalist stripped-backed performance felt intimate, and therefore a little out of place.
Shakira and Burna Boy perform official song
Colombian superstar Shakira and African giant Burna Boy performed the official FIFA World Cup song Dai Dai.
They were surrounded by Uganda's Ghetto Kids, a renowned dance and music troupe founded by a former maths teacher.
This performance brought the tempo way back up, jarring following Bieber's set, but a crowd favourite according to ABC Sport.
Coldplay, the Muppets, and an Aussie
The most random part of the whole show had to be The Muppets' Electric Mayhem performing a rendition of Seven Nation Army.
They were joined by Iranian violinist Bijan Mortazavi and an orchestra of musicians from the New York Philharmonic and Venezuela's Simón Bolívar Symphony Orchestra led by Gustavo Dudamel.
The Sesame Street flavour continued when Muppets from the show joined Disney's The Muppets to debut We Dance, an original song written by Coldplay for the occasion.
Coldplay was there too, including frontman Chris Martin, who curated the half-time show.
The PS22 Chorus performed too, with a cameo from Adriana Lima.
Australian Emmanuel Kelly, who appeared on season three of The X Factor, where he shared what it was like to live with a disability, was also part of the set.
A prior taste of Hollywood
The FIFA World Cup final began with a taste of Hollywood with Tinseltown superstar Tom Cruise delivering an inspirational monologue.
"Football is a language spoken without words, a force that unites people, turns strangers into friends, and reminds us of what we all have in common," Cruise said.
Robbie Williams performed official anthem Desire alongside Italian pop singer Laura Pausini and lead singer of the Pussycat Dolls Nicole Scherzinger.
Singer, actress and talk show host Jennifer Hudson sang The Star-Spangled Banner.