In short:
A group of pro-Palestinian protesters have launched a High Court challenge against Queensland laws that banned the phrases "from the river to the sea" and "globalise the intifada".
More than 20 people have been charged under the laws, which carry a maximum jail sentence of two years.
What's next?
The state government is required to respond the filings within a month.
A group of pro-Palestinian protesters have launched a High Court challenge against Queensland laws that banned the phrases "from the river to the sea" and "globalise the intifada".
The two phrases have been deemed antisemitic by the government and many Jewish organisations and have been outlawed when used to menace or offend someone.
Both of the contested phrases have been commonly used by pro-Palestinian protesters.
More than 20 people have been charged under the laws since they took effect in March.
The laws carry a maximum jail term of two years.
According to filings lodged with the High Court last week, the activists allege the legislation is invalid because it infringes on the right to political communication.
The Queensland government has previously defended the laws and argued in favour of their validity.
Speaking on Tuesday, Deputy Premier Jarrod Bleijie again defended the government's hate speech laws, saying they were put in place to protect the Jewish community from antisemitism.
He said the challenge was a "matter for the activists and protesters", and for the High Court to determine whether it would be heard.
"There's a long process to go - so that's all hypothetical at the moment," he told reporters.
"The law's the law at the moment."
'A massive overreach'
Marque Lawyers' Michael Bradley, who is representing the plaintiffs in the legal action, said the group wants the High Court to declare the laws invalid on the basis they infringe the constitution, and its implied right to political communication.
He rejected Mr Bleijie's description of the challenge as hypothetical, saying the High Court "will hear it" as it is a constitutional challenge.
"Australia's constitution guarantees freedom for everyone to communicate with each other on government and political matters," he explained.
"While governments can pass laws which limit or restrict that freedom, they have to do so in a way that is compatible with our democracy, our representative system of government.
"We say that this law is a massive overreach."
The state government has been served with the filings and has 28 days to respond, lawyers said.
Seven protesters have signed the filings, including Remah Naji, a spokesperson for the Justice for Palestine group.
Four of the signatories Stephen Werner Heydet, Edward Joel Matthew Carroll, Katherine Mary Dennehy and Samuel Woripa Watson - were arrested and charged under the laws, according to the documents.
Each are accused of displaying or saying the banned phrase.
One of the other applicants, James Frances Hillier, alleges he was told to withdraw some of his artwork that contained the banned phrase after being contacted by police in March.
The group claims neither of the banned phrases have a "fixed meaning", an "inherently antisemitic or racist meaning" or an "inherently violent meaning".
The filing lays out 12 alternative meanings of "from the river to the sea".
The filing alleges the ban causes inequality or discrimination because it seeks to criminalise one perspective on a "political controversy".
Jewish Board of Deputies president Jason Steinberg said he and other Jews felt unsafe when hearing the banned slogans chanted at rallies and protests.
"We have people who will not come into a central business district when there is protests on, when they know that there is going to be this kind of antisemitism on our streets," he said.
A 'chance of succeeding'
Constitutional law expert Anthony Gray believes a High Court challenge to the state's hate speech legislation has a "chance of succeeding".
He said the High Court had already recognised Australians have an implied freedom to communicate about political matters.
"On one view, the two phrases that have been banned are communications about something that is broadly political in nature," Professor Gray, who was not involved with preparing the challenge in any way, told the ABC.
The Bond University expert characterised the state government's legislation as "unusual" because it criminalised specific phrases and sought to outlaw one particular viewpoint.
He added that the nature of the phrases also added to the difficulty of banning them, as some people who used them may not have any "bad intentions".
The court could also consider whether the state government could demonstrate the legislation was necessary to protect some groups from suffering harm, Professor Gray explained.