Fri, 28 Aug, 7:40 pm, Final score, Bulldogs 96, Magpies 93
Fremantle defeats Geelong in AFL semifinal, as Ollie Dempsey goal controversially not awarded
Geelong coach Chris Scott has tried his best to downplay his reaction to Oliver Dempsey's controversial non-goal during Friday night's 14-point semi-final loss to Fremantle, saying sometimes he punches walls when he's happy.
Scott threw his arms up in the air in disbelief before giving the wall of the Perth Stadium coaching box a light punch when Dempsey's spectacular effort in the goalsquare was ruled to be a behind.
Instead of trying to mark Bailey Smith's rushed kick forward, Dempsey unleashed a bicycle-style kick over his shoulder while under the close attention of Matthew Johnson to volley through what looked to be a spectacular goal.
The goal umpire thought it had been touched, so it went to the AFL Review Centre for the final call.
Replays appeared to show the ball had hit Johnson's bicep before Dempsey's boot deflected the ball in, but the ARC declared the evidence wasn't sufficient, meaning the goal umpire's initial call of touch had to stand.
"I was surprised it was taking so long. It looked pretty clear to me," Scott said.
"But it's not for me to judge. From what I'm told, everyone has the same opinion that Ollie did."
When asked about his punch of the wall, Scott gave an unexpected answer.
"Sometimes I punch the wall when I'm happy. Sometimes I punch the wall when I'm annoyed," he said.
"There were a few moments where we had momentum and for one reason or another we couldn't capitalise on it. That was probably one of them.
"There's some strange things in the game at the moment that are better off being spoken about in the cold light of day, probably in November, rather than September."
Had Dempsey's effort been paid a goal, Geelong would have closed the margin to eight points early in the third quarter.
The Cats still managed to kick four of the next five goals after that incident to snatch an eight-point lead, before the Luke Jackson-inspired Dockers hit back to secure the 18.12 (120) to 16.10 (106) win and book a spot in the preliminary final against Sydney.
The Dockers are yet to win a premiership after joining the AFL in 1995.
Longmuir says Dockers have underdog status
Fremantle coach Justin Longmuir is claiming underdog status for the preliminary final against a decimated Sydney, as the odds of defender Brennan Cox fronting up appear slim.
"The job's not done," Longmuir said.
"I just spoke to the players then that it feels great, we played a really good brand of footy, you should get a lot of confidence out of that.
"But job's not done. So go 1-0 again."
Sydney are a club still reeling after suspending Isaac Heeney, Chad Warner, Nick Blakey, James Jordon and Riley Bice for the rest of the season for their roles in the Pullman Hotel saga.
Captain Callum Mills is also out for the rest of the season after rupturing his ACL.
The Swans defied the odds to crush Brisbane by 53 points in last week's qualifying final, but whether they can produce another huge effort with their weakened side against Fremantle remains to be seen.
Even though the Dockers have been installed as early favourites, Longmuir was talking up his side as the underdogs given the game will be played at the SCG.
"What they did against Brisbane, clearly it didn't seem like they missed any of those players," Longmuir said.
"They played a fantastic, selfless brand of footy.
"We'll go over there as underdogs, and they'll be really confident after their win against Brisbane, and they'll be heavy favourites on their home deck.
"We'll go over there and give it our best."
Cox had been slated for a return for the preliminary final week after injuring his calf in the final-round loss to Carlton.
But with Oscar McDonald performing soundly and Cox's body having shown some worrying signs even before the calf injury, there may not be room for Cox to win back his spot.
"Even before he got injured, he hadn't been putting the string of work together, so he's going to be pushing it," Longmuir said.
"He hasn't main trained yet, but we'll see where it falls. I think the majority of players would tick their role tonight.
"So when you're in the team and you play your role, it is hard to make changes."
Look back at how the action unfolded in our live blog.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Fremantle vs Geelong scoreboard
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
That's it from the blog tonight
One down, one to go on semifinal weekend. Freo are safely through to a prelim in Sydney next weekend, but we await tomorrow night's game to see who of Brisbane and Adelaide will play Hawthorn in the other preliminary final.
Hope to see you back here for that one tomorrow. Until then, thanks for your company this evening and goodnight.
Chris Scott is up for his press conference
The Geelong coach is speaking to the media now.
"There's a lot of emotions when you lose the last game. But I think it's appropriate to talk about our perspective initially and the way we hung in this season. This game was symptomatic of our season. A lot of things went wrong, we found ourselves behind the eight ball at times and found a way to hang in and give ourselves a chance.
"After a start like that, a lot of other teams would have turned up their toes. You go back to parts of the season where we thought "that's gonna make it really hard for us", but we hung in there."
On the Ollie Dempsey non-goal decision:
"I think the best thing to do is not reflect on it at all. I was supposed it was taking so long, it looked pretty clear to me. But it's not for me to judge.
"Post-game, especially post-loss, especially post-loss in a final, is not a time when I'm thinking clearly and not a time to litigate a decision like that. From what I'm told, everyone has the same opinion as Ollie did."
Match report: Dockers thwart Cats in pulsating semifinal
The Flagmantle dream is still alive for 2026 after ruckman Luke Jackson produced a Herculean display to lead Fremantle to a pulsating 14-point semi-final win over Geelong in Perth.
In front of 59,725 fans at Perth Stadium on Friday night, Fremantle skipped out to a 38-7 lead before Geelong hit the front in the third quarter on the back of three quick goals to Oliver Henry.
Staring down the barrel of a straight-sets finals exit, Fremantle lifted when it mattered most, with Jackson the biggest hero of them all.
Jackson kicked two late goals in the third quarter and set up another for Patrick Voss to give Fremantle back the lead.
In a pressure-filled final term, Geelong cut a 24-point deficit back to eight points with 75 seconds remaining.
But Wharfie Time - played for just the second time this year - sent the crowd into a frenzy, with Voss kicking his fourth goal from the ensuing centre clearance as Fremantle sealed the 18.12 (120) to 16.10 (106) victory.
The win set up a preliminary final against the Swans in Sydney next week.
Henry kicked a career-high five goals for Geelong, while Shannon Neale chipped in with three.
Geelong had made eight preliminary finals in the past 10 seasons, but having to travel to Perth for this year's semi-final proved a bridge too far.
Bailey Smith racked up 29 disposals and 751m gained, while Patrick Dangerfield followed up his five-goal haul against Carlton with two majors and two goal assists.
Jackson (25 disposals, 35 hitouts, eight clearances, two goals) was a clear best-on-ground, while Voss's four goals were also crucial.
Shai Bolton made up for his quiet display in last week's 32-point loss to Hawthorn with two goals from 26 disposals.
AAP
Patrick Dangerfield speaks after 'bittersweet' defeat
Freo's heroes on the night
There superstars had to deliver after laying an egg last week, and they most certainly did. Let's go through a few who I thought were the Dockers' best:
Luke Jackson: 25 disposals, 35 hit outs, eight clearances, 12 score involvements, two goals
Caleb Serong: 23 disposals, six clearances, 11 contested possessions, one goal
Andy Brayshaw: 24 disposals, four clearances, four tackles
Shai Bolton: 26 disposals, four clearances, eight tackles, 10 score involvements, two goals
Key Event
FT: Fremantle 18.12 (120) def Geelong 16.10 (106)
Wow. Not entirely sure what I've just watched there, but what I can report is that Fremantle will play in a preliminary final next week against the Sydney Swans.
Honestly I thought this game was over three minutes in, such was the power of the Dockers' start to this game. I definitely thought it was over at three-quarter-time, after another five-minute burst of inspiration before the break. In truth it probably wasn't over until those final seconds, with the ball in Patrick Voss's hands and then on his boot.
I guess the Cats deserve immense credit for fighting back as they did, time and again. They never thought this game was gone at any stage, and for a while there looked like they might pull off the heist.
But it's Freo's night, as it had to be. Straight sets would have been devastating after the season they have had, but a handful of those Freo boys weren't about to let that happen. It's curtains for the Cats, but September is only just beginning for the Dockers.
Patrick Voss calls game! Fremantle wins!
Wharfie Time works again! The Dockers win the critical centre clearance, get it deep to Voss who wins the free kick and set off the greatest celebration Fremantle has seen in 13 years!
What a game. What a night for the Dockers.
Tom Stewart has kicked a goal for Geelong!
First of all, that says it all about this game really.
More importantly though, it's an eight-point game. The Cats have to kick two goals in 1:15.
And what's this? They've just declared Wharfie Time.
Five minutes to play
It's a 14-point lead currently thanks to a rushed Fremantle behind and a shocking miss from Murphy Reid.
But crucially time has come off the clock. The Cats need three goals in no time. It looks unlikely, but you can never say never tonight.
Shannon Neale kicks another for the Cats! My word!
Crazy, crazy, stupid, insane, mad, ridiculous game.
The Serong goal had ended it! Surely! Nope, the Cats have kicked two goals from centre bounce to get the margin back to 12 almost immediately.
Neale was awarded a free kick for a very slight hold from Pearce on the lead, and drilled his set shot. Still 7:36 to play. Heaps of time now.
Shaun Mannagh hits straight back for Geelong
Or not. Who knows. It's a mad, mad game.
Patrick Dangerfield is in the middle for the first time all game, and he influenced that clearance heavily. The ball emerged and Mannagh was released. His kick on goal from 50 was converted. Hope?
Caleb Serong rises to the occasion! Freo wil surely win!
It's come from a panicked, rushed clearing kick from Tom Stewart, who has not had his best evening. The ball fell on Caleb Serong's chest and the stadium fell silent.
From 50 metres out, this little champion has delivered for his club yet again. What a footballer he is.
The lead is 24 points with eight minutes and change to play. I think the Dockers are into a preliminary final.
Ollie Henry gets one back for the Cats
That's goal number five for Henry, and in the nick of time too. This one comes from a loose ball 40 from goal, which he gathered and converted with a fine left-foot snap.
Back to 17 points. Ten minutes to play. Not done yet.
Michael Frederick kicks the first of the last! Freo nearly there!
With five and a half minutes wiped off the clock, the Dockers kick the opening goal of the term through Frederick and that might just break the back of this Geelong resistance.
Johnson had a massive win on the wing over Dempsey before he found Frederick. Feels like Johnson has had a significant night.
Key Event
3QT: Fremantle 15.6 (96) leads Geelong 12.8 (80)
Not sure there's been a more manic, less predictable game this season than the one we are watching tonight.
Geelong just played the perfect third quarter, right up until its last five minutes. The Cats dominated the play, missed some chances but eventually took enough to claim the lead. Their opponents looked slow and nervous and out of ideas.
And then, in the blink of an eye, it was all wiped away. In such a manner that this may not be recoverable for Geelong. Chris Scott will say the margin is only 16 points and they still won the term, but it doesn't feel like it anymore. It feels like Freo just threw the knockout blow.
But tonight, it seems nobody really knows anything.
Luke Jackson kicks another one after the siren!
It's pandemonium! In the space of five minutes, it feels like the Dockers have won the game! The Cats are shellshocked.
It's come from another free kick, as three of those four goals have, this one conceded by Edwards in the ruck. Haven't seen a replay so not sure what happened, but it's fair to say Jackson has absolutely taken Edwards to the cleaners in these last few minutes and maybe won his team the game in the process.
Patrick Voss has kicked another one for Fremantle!
In the space of three minutes, the game has totally changed again! The Dockers lead by 10 and are going to roar into the final term with a head of steam!
That was poor by the Cats, first from Edwards getting slaughtered in the ruck again by Jackson and then by Stewart who just watched as Voss ran free into space to receive the handball and goal. The crowd is going absolutely insane now with seconds to go.
Josh Treacy puts Fremantle back in front!
Another free kick to Fremantle gets them forward out of the middle, and Serong's pass to Treacy was a scorcher.
The Big Cohuna rocks back, let's it fly and splits the middle. And just like that, Freo are back in front!
Luke Jackson pulls one back for Freo
Under three minutes to play in the third, that goal is massive for the Dockers. All momentum gone, they needed a goal more than oxygen right now.
A sloppy free kick conceded by Edwards hands Jackson a shot which he doesn't pass up. It's a gift, but Jackson held his nerve from 40 out. Big moment.