In short:
Bangkok was declared a disaster-affected zone on the weekend after torrential rain led to widespread flooding.
Nearly 300 millimetres of rain fell in 48 hours, forcing locals to wade through floodwater to gather supplies.
What's next?
Locals are still struggling to access some parts of the city, but the water appears to be receding.
In the bustling metropolis of Bangkok, where some neighbourhoods are still paralysed by lingering floodwaters, locals are getting by in true Thai fashion: with a stoic smile.
The disaster has already caused an estimated $466 million worth of damage (฿11 billion), impacted 580,000 homes and killed at least eight people in the country.
Thousands are sheltering in evacuation centres and more than 80,000 people are unable to leave their homes, with the government deploying emergency food deliveries by boat.
But despite the ordeal, Bangkok resident Chris Kenneth has seen many people helping each other and responding to calls for help on social media.
"And it's not only people helping other people," he said.
"There are also cats, birds and other animals struggling in flooded areas, and people have been trying to rescue them.
"From what I've personally seen, there has been a strong sense of people helping one another."
Wading in floodwater to get food
Authorities declared all of Bangkok a disaster zone on Saturday after 300mm of rain fell in approximately 48 hours.
Kenneth noticed roads around his condominium starting to flood and vehicles struggling to get through on Friday.
"The rain just kept going for almost two days continuously," he said.
"The next morning, when I woke up, there was water all around my building."
The disaster has disrupted supply chains, leaving shelves empty and forcing some shops to close.
Kenneth's local convenience store was "almost empty" when he visited on Saturday, so he walked through floodwater to find food at a large shopping mall.
He is no longer worried about running out of supplies now that the water has started to recede.
But he wished officials had put out emergency warnings much sooner, allowing people to prepare.
"Bangkok is very vulnerable to heavy rainfall and flooding, so I think timely and clear information is extremely important," he said.
Disaster spreads across the region
Heavy rain is common in September during peak monsoon season and the disaster comes less than 12 months after a "one-in-300-year" flood hit southern Thailand, killing at least 145 people and affecting 2.7 million more.
India was also hit with heavy rain over the weekend, with floods and landslides killing at least 56 amid warnings more flash floods could be on the way.
On Sunday, Nepali authorities warned that flash floods could hit 49 of the country's 77 districts, with 14 people already killed.
And Myanmar's southernmost Tanintharyi region has also been hit by heavy rains since Friday night.
Authorities there have not yet released any official toll, but local rescue groups have reported several deaths.
The floodwater is starting to recede in Bangkok, but the city is just one of 41 provinces impacted across Thailand.
Authorities in the east coast province of Rayong ordered an evacuation on Monday after floodwaters pushed two reservoirs above capacity.
Rayong resident Vitavad Kasa said the situation was "still quite serious".
"There is a lot of water in some areas and travelling is difficult. People are worried about their homes and their daily lives," he said.
"It is also difficult for people to get to work and get essential things."
Kasa said Thai people were "sharing food and water, helping people move to safer places".
Lending a hand in times of crisis
Kasa's brother, Chatchapong Jindapoo lives in the Phanom Sarakham district, about 100 kilometres east of Bangkok.
He had to evacuate after his home was immersed in "very high" water and is now sheltering at a friend's clothing shop.
The group has set up a kitchen out the front and are cooking free food for those in need.
But Jindapoo remains concerned about the future.
"If the water is still there for a long [time], we will not have food or we will not have electronics or water to use," he said.
Memes and makeshift waterskis
Despite the challenges facing communities, some Thais have found an opportunity to have fun.
Social media is full of light-hearted videos of food delivery drivers sloshing through flooded streets or travelling by boat.
Kasa captured videos of Thais using motorbikes to tow boxes through the flood waters, creating a makeshift waterski.
"I had never seen anything like it before," he said.
"I think people were trying to have some fun in a difficult situation, but they still need to be careful because the flooding can be dangerous."
But some antics have attracted the ire of locals and authorities.
A man who was filmed riding a jetski through the streets of Bangkok, making large waves, has been arrested and charged with causing a public nuisance, according to local media.