In short:
Isabel Busher and Nathan Dekkers have been sentenced to jail terms for the torture of their bull terrier puppy, Douglas, in 2024.
The court heard that a neighbour recorded audio of the puppy being beaten and tormented on multiple occasions.
What's next?
The pair have been prohibited from owning another animal and will be eligible for parole after serving half of their sentences.
A West Australian couple who fatally tortured a puppy have been jailed.
Warning: This story contains descriptions of animal abuse, which some readers may find distressing.
Nathan James Dekkers and Isabel Maree Busher, both 26, admitted to torturing the bull terrier, Douglas, in Busselton in late 2024.
Facing the Bunbury Magistrates Court on Friday for sentencing, Dekkers was handed an 11-month jail term, and Busher was jailed for eight months.
The pair have also been permanently banned from owning another animal.
Both Dekkers and Busher had previously pleaded guilty to more than a dozen animal cruelty charges, including beating and tormenting the puppy and lying to RSPCA investigators.
They were due to be sentenced in May, but that was adjourned for Busher to undergo more psychiatric assessment.
Neighbours reported cruelty
The court heard the pair purchased the eight-week-old bull terrier puppy from a breeder in November 2024.
A neighbour overheard the couple abusing the dog on multiple occasions between December 8 and 23 and recorded audio of the incidents, which they later handed over to authorities.
While the tapes were not played in court, they were said to have captured the puppy's terrified whimpers and yelps as he was beaten and taunted.
On one occasion, an audio recording captured Douglas being strangled, while Busher taunted the puppy by growling and yelling at him.
On December 23, the couple was observed by neighbours driving off in a vehicle, returning about an hour later, with Douglas never seen again.
RSPCA inspectors and police attended the property that day, where they observed a yard that was small and fully paved, with a build-up of dog faeces and dried blood on the pavement.
The court heard the pair at first told authorities they had taken the puppy to a family member's farm; however, the relative later denied the claim.
'Sadistic and cruel'
Busher's defence lawyer Michelle Huber submitted there was no planning that had gone into Douglas' harm, but acknowledged the poor behaviour.
RSPCA prosecutor Ruby Harris described the offending as callous and wicked.
"The conduct was unwarranted, sadistic and cruel," she said.
In his decision, Magistrate Stephen Butcher said that while Dekkers was the one to strangle and slap the dog on at least one occasion, both were equally culpable in their offending.
He said he took into account intense community backlash toward the pair, including harassment they faced while attending court.
He also acknowledged a psychiatric assessment of Busher; however, he said it did not explain her offending.
"Her psychological profile explains some of the circumstances that have arisen here, but it doesn't excuse it," he said.
Authorities welcome decision
Outside court, RSPCA inspector Genna Haines welcomed the decision.
Ms Haines said it was one of the worst cases of animal cruelty she had seen in her career.
"We're pleased with the sentencing; the court has recognised the level of cruelty here," she said.
"The pain and terror Douglas was experiencing throughout the seven recorded beatings is evident."
Busher and Dekkers will be eligible for parole after serving half their sentences.