In short:
Fremantle's All-Australian star Mim Strom has pitched in as a ruck coach to help her side defeat Richmond.
Strom came off the field in the first quarter of Fremantle's 25-point win after hurting her shoulder.
Elsewhere in the AFLW, Geelong comfortably defeated Essendon while Carlton downed Collingwood.
Injured AFLW powerhouse Mim Strom was forced to play ruck coach on the bench as the Dockers steamrolled a Monique Conti-less Richmond by 25 points on the road.
Two-time All-Australian ruck Strom was in agony at Princes Park after a tackle from Tigers midfielder Emelia Yassir in the first quarter of Sunday's clash.
Recruit Eden Zanker was first cab off the rank in the ruck, while Gabby O'Sullivan kicked three goals to help lift the Dockers to a 9.6 (60) to 5.5 (35) win in Indigenous Round.
Later on Sunday, Aishling Moloney finished with four goals as Geelong posted a 13.5 (83) to 7.9 (51) result to pile the misery on a winless Essendon at Kardinia Park.
Lisa Webb's Dockers (2-2) can finish the fourth week of the 12-fixture competition in the top eight, but are bracing to lose Strom for part of their finals push.
Before Sunday, Strom had played 78 consecutive matches since making her debut in 2020.
"She's been on the bench with a big smile, so she's hard to get a read on, but I'll get a medical update," coach Webb told Seven Plus at three-quarter time.
"She's been a ruck coach on the side. She's been a warrior for us, and we'll look after her."
Richmond, which, like Fremantle, has not reached finals since 2024, drop from sixth and could finish as low as 13th with a 2-2 record.
The Tigers are unsure of how serious Conti's injury is, with the 2023 league best-and-fairest managing Achilles soreness.
The five-time All-Australian midfielder was a late withdrawal alongside Fina Dethlefsen, with recruit Georgia Stubs and Kate Dempsey returning to the side.
Youngster Isabel Bacon (24 disposals, six clearances) led the game in Conti's absence, and Olivia Wolmarans kicked two goals.
The Dockers took the early advantage after three lead changes in the opening quarter, pipping the Tigers by five points thanks to a goal from O'Sullivan.
Strom's absence did little to sap Fremantle's momentum, with O'Sullivan piling on back-to-back goals as the hosts were kept scoreless in the second term.
It was much the same after half-time, with the Dockers maintaining a perfect record against the Tigers across four meetings since season six in 2022.
At Kardinia Park, scores were level at 1.1 (7) for much of the first quarter before Chantal Mason gave away a free kick for a high tackle on Maggie Johnstone in Essendon's forward-50.
Johnstone converted after the quarter-time siren for a six-point lead, but the Bombers' ascendancy did not last long after Moloney came to life.
The star Irishwoman kicked four of Geelong's six goals in the second term, while the visitors managed just two to trail by 18 points.
Geelong improved its record to 3-1 to tighten its grip on a top-four spot, leaving Essendon languishing in 16th.
Mikayla Bowen had a monster 40 disposals, while Cats star Georgie Prespakis matched older sister and Essendon veteran Maddy with 27 disposals and five clearances.
AAP