In short:
The contract of Clarence Valley Council general manager has been terminated.
Laura Black will leave the role immediately, with 38 weeks pay, plus entitlements.
What's next?:
Clarence Valley Council has appointed Adam Cameron as the acting general manager.
The general manager of a northern New South Wales council has been sacked a week after she declared the wrong winner of a mayoral ballot.
Clarence Valley councillors held an extraordinary meeting today, calling for general manager, Laura Black, to resign or face having her contract terminated.
In confidential papers accidentally published on the council's website, a breakdown in the relationship between Ms Black and the majority of councillors was cited as the reason for asking her to step down.
The motion said it had led to the council becoming "dysfunctional".
Ms Black did not attend the meeting, but in her absence, councillors voted to terminate her contract.
Councillors noted that Ms Black had not been given notice of any dispute, nor had performance related issues raised previously.
The ABC has attempted to contact Ms Black for comment.
Botched mayoral vote
The contract termination comes a week after Ms Black declared the incorrect winner of a mayoral ballot, leaving the council in disarray.
Incumbent mayor Ray Smith and Cr Peter Johnstone were tied after a council vote.
Their names were put in a hat, and Mr Smith's name was drawn, but instead of calling him the winner as the rules stipulated, Ms Black named Mr Johnstone the new mayor.
When the error was discovered, Mr Johnstone resigned as mayor.
Five-year contract
Ms Black was appointed as the Clarence Valley Council general manager on October 7, 2022, on a five-year performance-based contract.
She had previously held the roles of acting general manager and director corporate governance of Clarence Valley Council.
Ms Black was paid a salary of $372,591 in the 2024/25 financial year.
Her contract includes a clause which entitles her to 38 weeks pay, which is approximately $272,000, plus entitlements.
The councillors thanked Ms Black for her service to the Clarence Valley Council and the community.
The director of Environment and Planning, Adam Cameron was appointed as the acting general manager for four weeks.
The council currently has no mayor, and no general manager. Cr Cristie Yager is the deputy and acting mayor.
Councillors were expected to meet next week to discuss the mayoral role.