In short:
Six people have died in separate road crashes on WA roads this weekend.
So far this year, there have been 127 road fatalities, higher than the 121 deaths recorded in the same 2025 period and above the 101 deaths of 2024.
A government minister has urged the public to play its part in improving road safety.
Six people have died in separate crashes in Western Australia over this weekend, as the state's road toll continues to soar.
The first fatality happened on Friday afternoon when a male driver died after his car crashed into a tree on George Road in Wuraming, near Boddington in the Peel region, about 1:10pm.
Just five minutes later in WA's Mid West, a 46-year-old man suffered the same fate in Cape Burney, near Geraldton, after the vehicle he was driving left Brand Highway and hit a tree.
On Friday night in Martin in Perth's south-east, a female passenger was killed after two vehicles collided at the intersection of Mills Road West on Tonkin Highway about 10:45pm.
The 30-year-old woman was a passenger in a Toyota Hilux and was taken to Royal Perth Hospital where she later died.
The vehicle's 33-year-old male driver was taken to Armadale Hospital with serious injuries, while the 38-year-old male driver of the other vehicle was taken to Royal Perth Hospital.
On Sunday, the 38-year-old was charged with five counts, including manslaughter and dangerous driving occasioning bodily harm.
The latest fatal crash occurred in Tarcoola Beach, Geraldton, on Saturday.
A 75-year-old male driver, who was the sole occupant, died at the scene after sustaining critical injuries.
WA road policing commander Mike Peters said "time may tell" if some of the fatal crashes were preventable.
"It's just mind-blowing that we can lose six people in such a short period of time, and the ongoing ripple effect for loved ones is going to be Christmas and all those times when they look to their loved ones, and they're not there," he said.
On Saturday night, WA Police conducted two "lockdown operations" in Joondalup and Northbridge, carrying out drug and alcohol tests in entertainment precincts.
Commander Peters said the Joondalup operation uncovered 30 people driving while impaired.
"Last night it was disturbing to see that 15 people drove while they'd consumed alcohol, and another 15 also drove after consuming illicit drugs," he said.
WA Premier Roger Cook said it had been a "dreadful" weekend on the state's roads, and the government was committed to improving road safety by upgrading infrastructure and technology.
"Our thoughts go out to all the families and friends impacted by these incidents and in particular can also just acknowledge the first responders, emergency workers that would have had to have attended what must be a horrific sight in relation to these accidents," he said.
"But we need people to do the right thing as well, making sure that you don't drive tired, distracted by your phone, impacted by alcohol or other drugs. Wear your seatbelt, drive to the conditions, don't speed.
"These are dreadfully tragic events, and the impact of them resonates right through the community and I just want to continue to urge everyone, please take extra care on the roads."
In the state's north west on Saturday morning, Major Crash investigators travelled to Mount Anketell in Karratha, where police said two people were believed to have died in a crash on the North West Coastal Highway.
Police said that about 5:30am, two vehicles collided head-on near the intersection of De Witt Road, with one vehicle catching fire.
The driver of the second vehicle was critically injured and taken to hospital.
Police urge any witnesses or people with video footage of the four crashes, to contact Crime Stoppers.
Surging road toll
So far this year, there have been 127 road fatalities, higher than the 121 deaths recorded in the same 2025 period and above the 101 deaths of 2024.
WA minister Simone McGurk said the government was committed to improving road safety across the state but urged the public to also play its part.
"As a state government we've spent hundreds of millions of dollars trying to improve our roads ... but we also need the public to get on board," she said.
"I don't know the exact circumstances of these fatalities. I just urge people to think about fatigue, seatbelt, speed, distraction and also alcohol and other drugs.
"Please take care on our roads because the price of not being careful can be just too much."
Insurer RAC recently predicted the state's yearly road toll would exceed 200 deaths and said the fatalities had been at crisis levels for several years.
WA has the second highest road death toll of any state or territory in the nation, even though road deaths per capita have decreased over the last 10 years