When it comes to American politics, Donald Trump may be more of a traditionalist than many give him credit.
Back in 1832, New York-based US senator William L Macy, defending the behaviour of president Andrew Jackson, uttered these immortal and now oft-repeated words.
"It may be, sir, that the politicians of the United States see nothing wrong in the rule that to the victor belong the spoils of the enemy."
The retort was a response to an ongoing fight between Jackson and his long-time political adversary.
Eight years earlier, Jackson accused his great rival John Quincy Adams of stealing the election but, after winning a decisive victory four years later, continued Adams's strategy of rewarding loyalists with plum government positions, otherwise known as the "spoils system".
Trump has always believed in his status as victor. And he's never been shy in collecting the spoils.
His most recent filings, for 2025, indicate the US president pocketed more than $US2.2 billion last year through ventures ostensibly run by his family.
He's put his name to everything from Bibles to mobile phones and plunged into the murky world of cryptocurrency with a personal meme coin and support for stable coins, even as he committed to deregulating the industry.
But his latest initiative has raised hackles even within his own party.
A fortnight ago, the US president's company, Trump Media and Technology Group, announced plans to sell early access to his social media posts for as much as $US100,000 a month.
Ever since he resumed office last year, Trump's erratic leadership and constant backflips - often telegraphed through his social media posts - have caused huge market swings that have delivered enormous profits to a lucky few.
Longtime Trump critic, Republican senator Lisa Murkowski, described the latest plan as "wild", arguing the presidency should not be used as a tool for accumulating personal wealth.
"Think it through," the Alaskan representative said. "You are talking about the ability to move markets when you're advancing information."
Another Republican critic, senator Bill Cassidy who was beaten in the primary by a Trump-backed candidate a few months ago, delivered an even harsher assessment.
"I think that's wrong. It's a form of buying access," he said.
Susan Collins, a Republican senator from Maine had a simple retort: "That does not sound appropriate."
An ugly stain on the beautiful game
Gianni Infantino is fighting for his future.
From basking in the afterglow of the World Cup just weeks ago, the FIFA boss is barely clinging to power after he stunned the football world with an audacious bid to privatise the tournament and other key events.
Adding to the insult, the investment firm on the other side of the deal was fronted by Joshua Kushner, the brother of Donald Trump's son-in-law.
While considered inappropriate, Infantino's frolics on the World Cup podium with the president, on the heels of his embarrassing "Peace Prize" presentation to Trump in the lead-up to the tournament, drew a largely muted response.
But this latest insult attracted an incendiary backlash.
Angry football associations expressed outrage at the $US4.2 billion proposal, with the European federation threatening legal action and demanding Infantino and Kushner retain all documents relating to the proposal.
Even world leaders expressed their disapproval, including the new UK Prime Minister Andy Burnham, while Canadian Prime Minister Mark Carney says he has "no confidence" in the FIFA boss.
Clearly, passions run higher in football than politics, because Infantino ended up junking the plan as questions mounted about his future in football's top job. The outrage at Trump's dealings has been far more muted.
While Trump is facing enormous challenges in the upcoming mid-term elections, they are mostly related to the Iran war and the rising cost of fuel in the US.
Complaints about his family's business dealings at home and abroad, on a scale never before seen, have gained little traction outside the political sphere.
So far, about half a dozen firms are believed to have signed up to the plan to receive early access to presidential decrees via Truth Social. But their identities have remained under wraps.
Trump Media and Technology Group spokespeople have dismissed claims of irregularity, arguing the information is public and that other social media operations offer similar services.
But there are differences. Subscribers to the new Trump service will receive access to messages a fraction of a second before the rest of the world.
That may sound inconsequential. But in a world of high-frequency trading run by computers working off algorithms and increasingly powered by artificial intelligence, every nanosecond counts.
While other social media platforms offer similar services, they are mostly for back-end data rather than news-breaking pronouncements from a sitting president who owns 41 per cent of the company releasing the information.
The US president has regularly stated he has no control over his private companies, including the media group that his son Don junior controls via a trust.
Few experts, however, are convinced the links are adequately severed.
"I'll be blunt," Gian Luca Clementi, an economics professor at NYU Stern School of Business, told Fortune magazine.
"This is insider trading by definition."
Oiling the wheels of finance
It took barely a minute to complete.
On Monday, March 23 at 6:49am New York time, a huge volume of oil futures contracts was pushed through the market.
By 6:50am, about $US580 million worth of contracts covering Brent crude, the global benchmark, and West Texas Intermediate changed hands, sending prices into free fall, dropping from just under $US100 a barrel to $US89.
The trading volume was around nine times the normal level with precise bets on the direction of both oil and equity markets.
Within minutes, Donald Trump announced, via Truth Social: "VERY GOOD AND PRODUCTIVE CONVERSATIONS" with Tehran over a "COMPLETE AND TOTAL RESOLUTION" to hostilities.
Hours later, as has since become routine, Tehran refuted the claims and oil prices began climbing, sparking calls for an investigation into the trading.
"This appears abnormal, for sure," XAnalysts chief oil analyst Mukesh Sahdev told the BBC.
"At that time, there were no indications that any serious talks had been taking place between the US and Iran.
"So, to place so much money on oil going down raises questions."
Five months later, and the identity of those behind the trading remains a mystery.
America's corporate regulator, the Securities and Exchange Commission, has refused to confirm whether it has an active investigation underway and it appears it has been left to the Department of Justice and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
The lack of action has stunned Democrats.
Back in April, New York congressman Ritchie Torres wrote to the SEC chair, Paul S Atkins, imploring him to launch an immediate investigation.
"This occurrence may constitute one of the largest instances of insider trading in history," Torres wrote.
"Whether or not that ultimately proves to be the case, the seriousness of the allegations demands immediate transparency."
Trading off presidential statements already has gone beyond traditional financial markets, shifting to areas that allow trades on almost anything.
In recent years, the rise of prediction markets like Polymarket and Kalshi have been used to bet on political and financial outcomes, raising concerns about the ethics of online betting and whether inside information is helping profiteers cash in on war.
A recent study by Columbia Law School and the University of Haifa has examined the blockchain ledger in search of odd trading patterns and discovered transactions generating profits of about $US143 million.
"The idea that someone would trade on national security information or information about upcoming terrorist activity - people thought that's not even possible," Joshua Mitts, a law professor at Columbia and one of the co-authors told Bloomberg.
"Today what we're seeing in these prediction markets is that actually it is quite possible."
No more audits
In the past few days, Todd Blanche, the acting head of the US Department of Justice, finalised the incredible offer made to Donald Trump and members of his extended family last May on his tax position.
Under the arrangement, Mr Trump cannot be audited or examined by the Internal Revenue Service for any year up until May this year.
Mr Blanche, formerly the president's personal criminal defence lawyer, wound back some of the provisions in his earlier immunity offer, negotiated in exchange for Mr Trump dropping his $US10 billion lawsuit against the IRS.
But with the substantive agreements remaining, the deal has far-reaching ramifications, given such immunity has never been applied to any president in history.
According to Liz Oyer, a former Department of Justice lawyer in charge of pardons and who was sacked earlier this year, the immunity deal is incredibly valuable to the president.
"Last year alone, Donald Trump made over $US2 billion," she told MS NOW (formerly MSNBC).
"There is nothing to make him pay his taxes on that money at this point."
Oyer estimates that the immunity agreement, in addition to letting him off the hook on any previous actions with the IRS, could excuse the president from paying hundreds of millions of dollars in tax on last year's earnings.
In the meantime, questions continue to be raised about the Trump family's business arrangements with the government.
The Washington Post this week published an expose on Department of Defence contracts awarded to companies in which Eric and Donald Trump Jr have an association.
These companies had seen government contracts and other funding arrangements grow to $US3.2 billion, a more-than-threefold increase since Trump's second term.
The Trump brothers claim their investments - many in new forms of warfare and weaponry - are a patriotic commitment to creating new American jobs and defeating China in the areas of drones and AI.
They've also stressed that they've never worked in government and are passive investors with no direct control over the companies.
But the president's personal and family business dealings stand in sharp contrast to those of his predecessors.
His most recent filings run to 927 pages and include 21,000 securities transactions and massive crypto ventures.
Joe Biden managed just 13 transactions in his entire four years in office.