AFL elimination final: Geelong ends Carlton's fairytale season as five-goal Patrick Dangerfield turns clock back
Geelong has ended Carlton's fairytale season with a solid win, after withstanding an early challenge to run away with their elimination final.
In the first finals meeting of the two teams since the 1995 grand final, Carlton got the early jump but could not keep control, as Geelong secured the win by 33 points on a rainy night at the MCG.
Geelong skipper Patrick Dangerfield led the way with five goals in his 378th AFL game.
Cats coach Chris Scott said Dangerfield stood tall when it counted.
"Late, [Dangerfield] was just so impressive," Scott said.
"It also wasn't as if he was bullying inexperienced players. He looked like Pat at his best."
The loss ended Carlton's season after a monumental run of 12 wins and a draw out of 16 games to get to the elimination final under new permanent coach Josh Fraser.
Geelong will travel to Perth to face Fremantle next week in a cut-throat semifinal.
Look back at how the action unfolded in the live blog below.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Geelong vs Carlton scoreboard
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
That's it for the blog tonight
We'll leave it there! Two finals down this weekend with two more to go, and the blog will be back tomorrow for both Sydney-Brisbane and Adelaide-Western Bulldogs. I hope yo can join us then.
For now, the night belongs to Geelong. On to the next one for Chris Scott and his Cats.
Chris Scott is up now
A bit here from the Geelong coach:
"I thought we were outplayed early in the game. We knew there would be periods where they would have the ascendency, their form has been red hot. Their guys in and around the ball are a real handful for us.
"I know there were a lot of rushed behinds, but there were a lot of scoring shots too. I thought we were dominant after quarter-time.
"It was really challenging when we lost [Max Holmes], but it was also really challenging to make the decision to play him tonight. But we had so much faith in the people that worked with him."
Josh Fraser has been speaking to media
A few bits and pieces here from the Carlton coach:
"We started the game reasonably well, but once their stoppage game and contest stepped up we found it really difficult.
"Tonight was disappointing, and we certainly don't want to be a club that lives in mediocrity. The players deserve a lot of credit, so do the staff and coaching group, but we don't want to be a club that is satisfied with finishing eighth.
"We were outplayed, they were far too good.
"I feel like I've got a really good handle on where we're at and understand we have a lot of work in front of us. We need to build depth, improve our players and build our system."
Match report: Cats kick clear to end Blues' stunning AFL season
Geelong have ended Carlton's dream run, kicking clear in the second half to win their AFL elimination final by 33 points.
Trailing by 21 points in the second term on Friday night, the Cats reduced the margin to three points at the main break and kicked 10 goals to six after halftime for the 14.23 (107) to 11.8 (74).
The crowd of 96,680 was the biggest for an AFL match at the MCG this season.
The Cats will head to Perth next week and play Fremantle in next week's semi-finals.
Geelong captain Patrick Dangerfield kicked five goals in the wet conditions, including three in the final quarter.
Midfielder Shaun Mannagh continued his strong form with 25 possessions and six clearances.
Under new coach Josh Fraser, Carlton turned around their disastrous 1-9 start to the season with a stunning run of 12 wins, two losses and a draw before Friday night's season-ending loss.
AAP
Patrick Dangerfield's night out
Let's go through the statline, shall we? And keep in mind Danger played exclusively forward tonight, no midfield time at all.
21 disposals. Five goals. 10 score involvements. 10 contested possessions. Two clearances. 485 metres gained.
Now there was a little bit of junk time in that, but it's also true that Dangerfield looked Geelong's most dangerous forward all night. He got his rewards in the last for a night of massive effort.
Patrick Cripps reflects on Carlton's night and incredible season
Really does feel like just the beginning for the Blues. Patrick Cripps I'm sure agrees.
Patrick Dangerfield reflects on a standout night
It wasn't perfect, he says, but it was still mighty impressive.
And as the man himself says, Patrick Dangerfield has still got it.
Key Event
FT: Geelong 14. 23 (107) def Carlton 11.8 (74)
Geelong was challenged, Geelong was threatened, but Geelong never blinked. The Cats weathered the early Carlton storm and then flexed their muscle in the second half to highlight the difference between a side on the rise and a battle-hardened group of challengers.
Patrick Dangerfield will take the headlines for his five goals, but I thought the big differnce makers were those classy Geelong half-forwards and lesser-light midfielders. Miers, Mannagh, Wiltshire, Close, players of that ilk whose polish and smarts were the difference in the game.
Carlton showed glimpses of the footy that has carried them from the depths of despair to September, but they ran into a powerful unit and in the end ran out of legs. This result will not detract from their season, but hopefully will inspire added hunger over the summer.
The Cats are heading west, and I don't think the Dockers will be excited to see them coming.
Ben Ainsworth gets one now for the Blues
Been a very solid acquisition for Carlton this year, that being his 30th goal of the campaign. A strong return for a small forward.
We've got 3:15 to play in this one, Geelong leads it by 32.
Cooper Lord dribbles another through for the Blues
These are consolation goals for Carlton at this point, but Lord won't turn down his second.
When things have gone well for Carlton, that forward line has ended up very open. Hasn't been enough of it in this second half.
Bailey Smith! A bomb from 50... which is touched
Bailey just set that one up on the breeze and let it float its way on through. It's all going Geelong's way in this second half.
Not been Smith's best night, but he's certainly done his bit.
EDIT: Never mind, the ARC says Jagga Smith touched it. Ahh well.
Brodie Kemp pulls one back for the Blues
The sting has long since gone out of the game as the rain tips down, but the Blues this time are able to find enough numbers out the back for Kemp to goal from the line.
Seven minutes still to play in this last quarter and it looks like Chris Scott is taking the veterans off the ground. They've got a trip to Perth to prepare for.
Patrick Dangerfield has five goals in a final!
He's going ballistic! Danger initially dropped the mark from the Holmes kick, but his new opponent Jacob Weitering went to ground and left the Cats skipper a free run at it.
Dangerfield gathered, stepped, and bombed one home off a step from 50. It's a remarkable night for a champion footballer.
Frankie Evans grabs another for the Blues
He's been one of Carlton's best tonight and one of their real success stories of 2026. He stuck the tackle on Blicavs, was rewarded with the HTB call and nailed his second.
The crowd is thinning, but the Blues faithful who have remained will be pleased to see yet another Evans goal.
Make it four for Patrick Dangerfield!
So of his last three finals, he was best on ground in the 2025 prelim, totally anonymous in the 2025 granny, and now among the best on ground in the 2026 elimination final.
A pretty soft high free kick earned him another look at the big sticks, and Danger made no mistake. The Cats might start thinking about resting some players now.
Patrick Dangerfield has three! The Cats are surely home
He's still got it, Danger. He's been Geelong's most dangerous forward tonight, selfless at times and punishing at others. We've seen him take a loose ball, get around onto that right foot and snap a goal a million times before.
It's a six-goal lead and the Cats have kicked seven in a row. It looks like the Carlton fairytale ends here.
Shannon Neale plucks and goals for the Cats!
You don't want to call it this early, but it's going to be mighty tough for the Blues now.
How did Geelong escape Carlton tight on the boundary line? Poor missed tackles, half-hearted defensive efforts. And suddenly Bailey Smith is flowing forward and finding Neale, who did brilliantly to outpoint Weitering. It's 29 now, and nearly done for the Cats.
Final quarter is underway
For one of these sides, this is the final quarter of their season. The Blues need a four-goal turnaround to make sure it's not them.
Ball is in the air, here we go.
Key Event
3QT: Geelong 10.13 (73) leads Carlton 7.8 (50)
That was a powerful quarter from Geelong. They suckered the Blues into their game of Russian roulette and soundly beat them, putting a gap in the game almost entirely off Carlton turnovers.
What now seems stark is that when Carlton was well on top early in the game, Geelong held its nerve and did not get put away. The Blues have not had that same composure during the Cats' strong periods.
Still plenty of time left, but it's all trending one way. Only potential bad news for Geelong is Max Holmes limping from the field at the end of that quarter.