WARNING: This story contains vision and details that may distress some readers.
A man who "doggedly" tried to kill a woman outside a Perth apartment complex in a horrific attack captured on CCTV has been sentenced to 16 years in prison.
Mihael Vrhovsek, 29, was convicted of attempted murder for the attack in Rivervale in 2024.
The Supreme Court jury was shown a graphic video of Vrhovsek confronting the woman, which the ABC has published excerpts of.
Loading...The 29-year-old grabbed the woman by the throat, lifted her off her feet and carried her, before dropping her limp body to the ground.
A man then intervenes, confronting Vrhovsek, which allowed the woman who was walking her dogs an opportunity to drag the victim away.
She was able to walk on her own, but Vrhovsek - having broken free of the man who had confronted him - ran after her and again began to choke her.
The man who had intervened returned, punching and kicking Vrhovsek in a bid to get him to let go, before the woman walking her dogs was again able to drag the victim away.
'Abusive, menacing and sinister'
In court today, Justice Alain Musikanth said Vrhovsek had used extreme violence, including continuing to strangle the woman once she had lost consciousness.
"Your actions involved deliberate and controlled choices ... you were doggedly determined to kill her," he said.
Justice Musikanth praised the courage of the bystanders who were "instrumental" in saving the woman's life, describing them as "heroes".
In the days leading up to the attack, Vrhovsek called or texted her more than 230 times using multiple mobile phones, many of which Justice Musikanth said were "abusive, menacing, and sinister".
"I accept she was so affected by the avalanche of abusive communications from you she reported your action to police, saying she was scared you were going to kill her," he said.
The defence said Vrhovsek had a "troubled upbringing", and struggled against his "demons", which "included self-medication".
They said his conduct was serious but abhorrent, arguing he is not likely to reoffend, and that he had expressed "visceral" remorse when the CCTV footage of the incident was shown to the court.
But Justice Musikanth said he was unable to find Vrhovsek had any true empathy, or remorse for his victim.
He will become eligible for parole in 2038.