In short:
A relative of missing Mackay schoolgirl Marilyn Wallman has been identified as a person of interest in a new inquest into her 1972 disappearance.
A second coronial inquest is being held after the first in 1980 failed to determine who was responsible for the 14-year-old's death.
What's next?
The inquest is expected to hear from 20 witnesses over the next three weeks.
An inquest into the disappearance of Mackay schoolgirl Marilyn Joy Wallman has heard of a supposed deathbed confession about a family member's involvement.
Marilyn disappeared soon after 7:42am on March 21, 1972, after cycling a kilometre down a dirt road to catch a school bus.
Noel Morris, who was related to the Wallman family by marriage, has been named as a person of interest in her disappearance and will appear as a witness at the inquest.
Counsel assisting Coroner David O'Connell, John Aberdeen, said Mr Morris was implicated in the teen's death in two similar stories told by other members of the Morris family.
"It's an odd thing to raise, Your Honour, and that's the reason it's taken very seriously," Mr Aberdeen said.
He said the inquest would also hear that Mr Morris drove a car of a "similar description" to one police sought after Marilyn's disappearance.
Alleged drinking confession
Witness Errol James Morris, 77, made a statement to police in 2016, saying he recalled a conversation with his brother Lionel, known as Joe.
"He came up to me about 20 years ago when he was drinking and said words to the effect of 'someone in our family was involved in the disappearance of Marilyn Wallman,'" Errol Morris said.
"I said he was stupid for saying that, and he reaffirmed it was someone in our family."
Errol Morris said the conversation occurred when he was driving Joe home and they were possibly in the area of Wallmans Rd.
"I just thought he was being foolish; he was a regular large drinker, and at that time I didn't think very much about it."
Statement contradicted
Witness Denis Riddel denied he told his neighbour he believed his cousin, Noel Morris, was involved after seeing him interviewed on television in 2018.
Mr Aberdeen said Mr Riddel's neighbour said she heard him sobbing in the back yard.
"She said she asked you if you were all right, and you said that after watching the current affairs show last night you knew that Noel Morris did it," Mr Aberdeen said.
"You said after hearing what Joe Morris said on his deathbed to his brother ... that 'you know Noel did the Wallman girl in', that his brother said 'yes I know', or 'I thought so'.
"You said that after seeing him on TV you remembered what Joe had said and that upset you."
Mr Riddel said he could not recall making the comments and had only said that Noel was his cousin.
Unusual not to ride together
Rex Wallman, now 63, was eight when he and his older brother David, then 11, followed 10 minutes behind Marilyn toward the bus.
Mr Wallman recalled a busier-than-usual morning, with Marilyn having trouble with her school uniform and being anxious about missing the bus for sports day.
He said it was unusual for them not to ride to the bus together.
"Marilyn had a sports day and didn't want to miss the bus, so she took off. David and I were still cleaning our teeth, getting ready to go."
After riding down a dip in the road, he saw Marilyn's bike on the side of the road and the carry-all at the front of the bike holding her bag on the ground.
"At that stage, David and I didn't know what had happened, so we looked around. David said: 'I'm faster than you on the bike; I'll whip home and get mum and you stay here.'"
Mr Wallman said he felt scared being on his own and moved to the centre of the narrow bitumen road, sitting down and hugging his bicycle.
He said no other vehicles passed as there were only two cane farms on the road and a quarry infrequently used by council.
He said he heard voices coming from the cane field.
"A girl's voice saying things like 'my leg hurts', then another voice which sounded more like a man's voice or another voice a bit more, such a loud tone, I guess you could say.
"I heard it a couple of times; to me, it appeared not far over the other side of the cane field.
"They only appeared for a short time and then silence."
'I didn't lie'
Rex Wallman recalled being interviewed by detectives as a child and questioned about a statement in which he agreed with police that he did not hear any noises from the cane.
"At the time it felt like no one believed me, no one wanted to listen to me or take any notice of what I needed to say ... the badgering made it easier to say no,"
he said.
"I don't recall saying I was telling lies. I don't agree with the statement that said I was telling lies."
He told the inquest he did not doubt what he heard.
'Something doesn't seem right'
David Wallman, now 65, said he first thought Marilyn had come off her bike, bumped her head and wandered off into the cane.
"Rex and I called out looking for her; I thought something doesn't seem right here ... she's hurt, we need to find her and get Mum on the job," he said.
"I said to Mum, 'Marilyn's had a buster, and we can't find her'. Mum jumped in the car and went back, and we started calling out.
"We walked down the headland again, in the cane paddock a little bit and Mum drove around to the end of the paddock."
Marilyn and mum were close
Rex Wallman said his mother had always felt Marilyn had wanted to tell her something before she disappeared, but the family had visitors that weekend.
In the years after her disappearance, Mrs Wallman drove her sons to school.
"Mum would continually tell us she was upset she didn't give Marilyn the time. We had a lot of people in the house that weekend, and she had a feeling Marilyn wanted to sit down and have a chat with her.
"They had an extraordinary relationship, more like they were best friends rather than mum and daughter."
Former detective
Retired detective Andre Wijtenburg was Mackay's cold case officer from 1993 and interviewed Noel Morris in about 2009 after speaking to his estranged wife Ann.
He said Mr Morris was not willing to discuss Marilyn's disappearance.
Mr Wijtenburg said Ann Morris, who was related to the Wallmans, had suspicions about her former husband's involvement.
"Initially she was scared of Noel and didn't want to talk to police because of that," Mr Wijtenburg said.
Under cross-examination from barrister Scott McLennan, Mr Wijtenburg agreed he had emailed a detective after his retirement, saying Ann was "a little unreliable and perhaps unstable".
Other suspects
Mr McLennan also questioned Mr Wijtenburg about a trip to Victoria to interview another suspect, Michael Anthony Francis, who had been convicted and jailed for sexual violence offences in Mackay and interstate.
Mr Wijtenburg said Mr Francis refused to be interviewed but did not deny his involvement.
Mr McLennan said Mr Francis had admitted to stealing women's underwear in Mackay and had collected more than 400 garments.
He said Mrs Wallman had reported underwear disappearing from her bedroom drawer in the 12 months before Marilyn disappeared; however, she was never shown the underwear Mr Francis was found with.
Noel Morris's barrister also raised another suspect who was convicted of indecently treating his niece and great-niece at the time.