In short:
There has been a lull in hostilities between the US and Iran.
The pause has revived hopes of a return to negotiations after nearly two weeks of consecutive nightly US bombardments.
What's next?
US ambassador to the United Nations Mike Waltz said Donald Trump had paused attacks in Iran and was "giving talks some space".
Iran has passed another night without US air strikes, as Washington pauses a war nearing its fifth month and reports emerge that concerns over dwindling munitions were restraining plans for further escalation.
The lull has revived hopes of a return to negotiations after nearly two weeks of consecutive nightly US bombardments, although US media reported the pause could also reflect pressure on stockpiles of Patriot interceptors and other defensive weapons.
Iran would halt attacks as long as the United States maintained its pause on strikes, a senior Iranian source said, adding that Tehran remained sceptical of US intentions.
"Iran's position remains 'attack for attack': if the attacks stop, Iran will also halt its operations. That message has already been conveyed to the United States," the source told Reuters a day after Washington halted attacks following 13 successive nights of air strikes.
"There is more scepticism than optimism about the halt in attacks. The prevailing view is that the pause is tactical rather than genuine," the source said.
It comes as US ambassador to the United Nations Mike Waltz said President Donald Trump had paused attacks to allow more room for diplomacy.
"He's giving talks some space, he's giving it a little bit of room," Mr Waltz told Fox News on Sunday.
Meanwhile, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said he would be visiting Washington on Monday, on Mr Trump's invitation.
"I will also discuss all pending issues with President Trump, including the situation in Iran," he said on X.
Fighting over the strategic Strait of Hormuz derailed diplomatic efforts between Washington and Tehran, but the conflict then expanded beyond the vital energy corridor to include attacks on US bases, regional shipping and Gulf allies.
However, US operations against Iran were "on a hold", CNN reported, quoting an unidentified Pentagon source, even as Mr Trump threatened a "much higher level" of strikes on Friday.
Plans to escalate the campaign have been shelved in part because of those shrinking supplies, The New York Times reported, citing two people briefed on the matter.
Mr Trump also faces the risk of a wider Middle East war, the estrangement of vulnerable Gulf allies and further shocks to the global economy, the newspaper said.
US Vice-President JD Vance and top general Dan Caine both raised concerns about escalation at a White House meeting on Friday, CNN reported.
General Caine told Mr Trump the military could carry out the options available to him successfully but warned of the possible implications, according to the network.
Trump undecided
Mr Trump said on Friday he had not decided whether to return to an all-out operation.
"We're talking to them right now. I think they're getting more and more serious," he said.
Mr Trump said Iran faced a choice between a deal and strikes at a "much higher level".
The war that Mr Trump once predicted would last four or five weeks is now nearing its fifth month, and is weighing on the Republicans' approval ratings ahead of crucial US midterm elections in November.
The Pentagon had presented Mr Trump with a plan for a 14th night of strikes but he declined to authorise it in favour of a push for talks, Axios reported.
Fighting spreads
Fighting has spread to a new front.
Yemen's Iran-backed Houthi rebels said they struck Saudi Aramco sites in Jizan and Yanbu on Saturday, a day after Riyadh bombed Houthi targets.
A surface-to-air battery operated by Greek personnel in Saudi Arabia downed two ballistic missiles and a drone over Yanbu, the Greek air force media office said.
Iran's Revolutionary Guards said they had stopped four ships attempting to transit the Strait of Hormuz in 24 hours.
Tehran's effective blockade of the waterway remains the central flashpoint with Washington.
Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi said Iran could not be blamed for the escalation and offered to broker talks between the Houthis and Riyadh, saying "there is no military solution".
ABC/AFP/Reuters