analysis
Ousted prime minister Sheikh Hasina vows to return to her country and political life. What could it mean for Bangladesh?
Politics has defined almost every chapter of Sheikh Hasina's life.
Widely known as Bangladesh's "Iron Lady" during her 15 years in power, the former prime minister and daughter of the country's founding leader lived a life shaped by the nation's most powerful political dynasty.
She was last seen in her home country fleeing on a military helicopter while thousands of protesters stormed her official residence, the culmination of weeks of mass demonstrations against her leadership.
Now, two years later, a rare appearance from the 78-year-old suggests she is unwilling to accept that her political career is over.
Despite being sentenced to death by Bangladesh's International Crimes Tribunal, she used her first public address since fleeing the country in 2024 to publicly declare she would return home in December.
In a tightly packed room at New Delhi's Foreign Correspondents' Club, journalists strained to hear the former prime minister via a dodgy audio link on a large screen.
But rather than confront the crimes she has been convicted of, and sentenced to death over, in Bangladesh, the press conference instead resembled a carefully choreographed relaunch of her now-banned Awami League.
Rather than reflecting on the allegations against her, Hasina spoke of returning to Bangladesh and reclaiming her political future.
Will Sheikh Hasina really return?
The prospect of returning to Bangladesh is hardly an attractive one.
Beyond the death sentence, Hasina faces multiple criminal cases, including allegations of murder, attempted murder and abduction. Bangladesh's BNP government has repeatedly said she would be arrested immediately upon arrival.
But whether she ultimately boards a flight to Dhaka may be beside the point.
Simply declaring that she will return allows Hasina to project defiance, reassure loyal supporters she has not abandoned them, and place herself back at the centre of Bangladesh's political conversation.
Her return would also create a dilemma for Bangladesh's government.
Although the BNP has repeatedly demanded Hasina's extradition, bringing her back into Bangladesh also risks reigniting the political tensions that have only recently begun to settle after years of upheaval.
Sreeradha Datta, an international affairs professor at Om Prakash Jindal Global University, said that despite the Awami League being banned from politics, Hasina's public statement would likely "uplift the lagging spirit" of loyalists.
"There is very little leadership; most of the senior Awami leaders have fled. I think this is Hasina's way to motivate them,"
Professor Datta said the BNP government likely feared Hasina's return would spark a mass mobilisation of Awami League supporters.
"There's the possibility of violence," she said.
Hasina's political influence is not lost on the BNP.
In the lead-up to the event, Bangladesh's government warned local media against publicising her speech and criticised New Delhi for allowing it to proceed.
Professor Datta also believes the death sentence itself could eventually become negotiable.
"I think they would rethink it. She was the prime minister, and I think the government will say, 'We're a different Bangladesh; we're not vindictive like we used to be' to convey a sense that they are much more evolved."
A calculated move by India
In the days leading up to the event, Bangladesh criticised India for allowing the address to proceed, calling it another setback in already strained bilateral relations.
New Delhi responded by describing it as a private event beyond the government's control.
In practice, however, it is difficult to imagine a politician as controversial and strategically significant as Sheikh Hasina staging a high-profile public appearance in India's capital without approval.
"If the Indian government didn't want this to happen, it would not have happened," Professor Datta said.
India's continued decision to shelter Hasina remains deeply contentious. For the families of the estimated 1,400 people killed during the 2024 protests, her exile in New Delhi represents denied justice.
But politically, exile may suit both governments better than extradition.
Bangladesh's BNP government can continue portraying India as the protector of a convicted former leader while avoiding the domestic instability her return could trigger.
India, meanwhile, retains a politician who has been loyal to India's interests for decades and may still command loyalty among sections of Bangladesh's political elite.