In short:
A couple are on trial at the Supreme Court for allegedly fatally stabbing a woman who visited their Busselton home in 2024.
The court heard the victim, Tara Morrison, had been in a relationship with murder accused Hannah Glover, who said multiple knives had been used in the murder.
What's next?
The trial is set down for six weeks.
A woman was stabbed to death and her body stuffed in a child's wardrobe after a frenzied attack arising from a "love triangle" that left the walls of a Broadwater home spattered in blood, a Perth court has heard.
WARNING: This story contains graphic details that may distress some readers.
Hannah Louise Glover, 30, and James Anthony Sorgiovanni, 29, are accused of murdering Tara Marie Morrison in the Busselton suburb of Broadwater in April 2024.
The Supreme Court heard Ms Morrison had been in a sexual relationship with Ms Glover before the accused started a relationship with Mr Sorgiovanni, with whom she lived at Bell Drive.
Listening devices planted in prison by police allegedly captured Ms Glover admitting to the murder to a fellow inmate and saying multiple knives had been used.
Prosecutor Michael Cvetkoski said that on the day she was murdered, Ms Morrison went to the Bell Drive home, where she used methylamphetamine with the couple.
Mr Cvetkoski said a neighbour heard screaming from the house, "like a woman was in pain and distressed", which lasted for 30 minutes.
"She [Ms Morrison] was, in every sense of the word, fighting for her life," he said.
"She had, in every sense, no hope."
The court was shown graphic footage of the blood-spattered house and Ms Morrison's body, which had been stuffed in the wardrobe of Ms Glover's toddler daughter's bedroom.
The court was also shown CCTV of people on a scooter, which Mr Cvetkoski said were Mr Sorgiovanni and Ms Glover leaving the scene with Ms Glover's daughter, then aged 18 months.
The gas had been left on at the house because Ms Glover and Mr Sorgiovanni intended to burn it down, the prosecutor said.
Jealous love triangle
Mr Sorgiovanni told police Ms Glover had attacked Ms Morrison while he tried to help her and call Triple Zero (000), the court was told.
Ms Glover allegedly told a fellow inmate that Mr Sorgiovanni had restrained the victim as she was being stabbed.
Mr Cvetkoski said Ms Glover had referred to a "love triangle" and that Mr Sorgiovanni and Ms Morrison were jealous of each other.
Ms Glover's lawyer, Anthony Eyers, said his client admitted to being in the Bell Drive home when Ms Morrison was killed, but maintained Mr Sorgiovanni had committed the murder.
He called on the jury members to "keep open minds".
Mr Sorgiovanni's lawyer Lisa Boston said the evidence would show that Ms Glover had killed Ms Morrison.
She said her client had been affected by drugs and had woken up to "a horror show" after passing out on his bed.
The sedative effects of the drugs had prevented Mr Sorgiovanni from stopping Ms Glover, his lawyer said.
The trial is set down for six weeks.