Delta Goodrem headlines Commonwealth Games closing ceremony as Australia tops medal haul
Delta Goodrem shone on a saltire-shaped stage as Glasgow waved farewell to the Commonwealth Games in spectacular style by the banks of the River Clyde.
As a packed Hydro crowd roared with Scottish rock band Simple Minds and fireworks lit up the River Clyde waterfront, lingering fears were momentarily set aside.
The Commonwealth Games, having been on life support, are alive and kicking.
The Australian athletes were led out by Georgia Baker, who earned flagbearer honours by adding two gold medals in Glasgow to take her record-equalling cycling tally to five.
Glasgow's cut-price "Friendly Games" were inescapably cheerful and run with good humour throughout, even through persistent summer rain, in tribute to a proud city that picked up the pieces when Victoria pulled out.
Eleven days of competition - which produced 171 medals for table-topping Australia - came to a close in a celebration of athletic performances as Glasgow 2026 formally passed the baton to Amdavad 2030.
It came with an unmistakable message from Scotland's gritty cultural hub, its people and the headline act: Don't you forget about me.
Scottish singer-songwriter Sandi Thom, shimmering in a sequined saltire dress, kicked off the closing ceremony with her reworked football anthem Proud to Be from Scotland.
Australian pop princess Delta Goodrem also shone on the saltire-shaped stage, opening with Born To Try and belting out a cover of John Farnham's You're the Voice with Scottish country and folk singer-songwriter Cammy Barnes.
Goodrem's presence was designed as a metaphor for an extension of Scotland's hand of friendship to the country that was originally to have staged the Games.
Australian chef de mission Petria Thomas expressed gratitude to Glasgow for taking on hosting duties after Victoria pulled out.
"The Commonwealth Games is a really critically important event," Thomas said.
"If this had not been on it would have left a huge hole in our in the calendar, and for many athletes this is their first experience in a multi-sport environment.
"There's nothing that can compare to going into those sort of environments, so to give them the opportunity to do it here in Glasgow has been incredible.
"For so many of our Australian athletes, the Commonwealth Games is their launching pad."
Goodrem's medley led into a "festival of connection" supported by musicians in Highland dress and the appearances of Glasgow-based rapper Bemz and neo-traditional folk band Elephant Sessions.
Scotland's dual gold medallist Melanie Woods - who won the 400m T54 and 1500m T54 races - was handed the David Dixon Award for fair play and contribution to the Games.
Glasgow 2026 organising committee chair George Black hailed the city for putting on an "unforgettable" event.
"Together we have achieved something extraordinary and I am extremely proud of Glasgow," Black said in his address.
"Once again this city has shown the world who we are."
The 2030 hosts, Amdavad, also known as Ahmedabad, gave a vision of the celebration to expect in four years' time.
The colourful and extravagant showcase was dubbed "The world is one family", and included performances by Indian artists Rashmika Mandanna and Shankar Mahadevan, amid a cast of about 200 dancers.
Prince Edward, Duke of Edinburgh, formally closed the event, thanking athletes for their efforts.
"You have brought the spirit and values of the Commonwealth to life," the Duke said.
"You have inspired us and, hopefully, future generations. You have also demonstrated what unites us."
UK street dance group Diversity lit up the stage, bringing the crowd to its feet and another troupe performed a traditional Gaelic ceilidh with a modern twist.
But local lads Simple Minds had the final say, bringing down the curtain on Glasgow 2026 as fireworks lit up the sky from the Finnieston Crane to Govan Docks.
Catch up on the action of the final day of the 2026 Commonwealth Games in our blog below.
AAP
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Recap
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 9:04am
That's all from us!
Thanks a bunch for being here not just this morning, folks, but on every. single. day of these wonderful Commonwealth Games.
It's been excellent to spend these very uncharitable hours with you, watching Aussie athletes do us proud on the world stage.
We'll see you next time!
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 8:48am
How Simple Minds brought the show to a close
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 8:33am
There was some sport on today!
For those of you who only joined us for the colour and fun of the closing ceremony, worth reminding that there was some absolutely cracking competition on the final day of the Games.
For one, there were SIX MORE GOLD MEDALS (you can see each at the top of the blog) FOR AUSTRALIA.
But also five silver medals (from the judo and the track cycling) as well as a bronze medal for the Diamonds!
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 8:17am
The Games weren't perfect, but they meant the world to many
And speaking of the ABC's Jon Healy, as the final notes of Simple Minds rang out at the Hydro in Glasgow, he was penning his thoughts on the last 10 days of Commonwealth Sport.
"These Games can mean government waste to Victorians, they can mean occasional traffic inconveniences to Glaswegians, they can mean late nights or early mornings on a blog or stream for many of you," Jon writes.
"But they can also mean a new beginning, for athletes young and old, and for the Games as a whole."
I'd recommend you grab a cuppa and take a read of his whole piece below:
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 8:07am
The view from Glasgow
My moment of the Games was Georgia Godwin winning gold in the women's team gymnastics. That clutch floor routine and vault to secure the gold with her teammates after such a long road back from a torn Achilles, and her emotion afterwards, was beautiful.
- Jon H ... no, that's too obvious. Call me J Healy
Also, last night's late-night men's 4x100m relay ceremony was fun and strange in an end-of-term kinda way.
- Jon H ... no, that's too obvious. Call me J Healy
There aren't many who've had a better view of these Games than the ABC's Jon Healy, who's been your man in Glasgow for the past 10 days.
I reckon these are as good as any for the best moment of these Games.
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 7:50am
Aussie chef de mission gets Commonwealth ink
Petria Thomas has been out in Glasgow today getting a permanent reminder of these Games.
The nine-time Commonwealth gold medallist said the Games have a special place in her heart, and now a special place on her body.
"I've thought about it for a long time and the Commonwealth Games has been such a big part of my life, as big a part as the Olympics. So I thought why not get the Commonwealth Sport mark as well, and I'll wear it very proudly.
"The Commonwealth Games has played such an important part of my life and I wanted to get something to remember that."
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 7:39am
The 2026 Glasgow Commonwealth Games are over
But we're not leaving just yet!
Stay a while and let's unpack that closing ceremony, as well as some of your favourite moments from these Games.
Don't be shy on that comment button up there folks, I'd love to hear from you.
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 7:33am
Don't You (Forget About Me) time!
No way they were gonna leave us without their 1985 smash hit, Don't You (Forget About Me).
And I don't think we will Glasgow.
Wow, the Hydro is in FULL VOICE to close us out here.
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 7:29am
Simple Minds bring us to a close
The Scottish rock legends will be the final act of this closing ceremony.
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 7:25am
THE UNICORNS ARE BACK
NOT A DRILL FOLKS!!!
OUR SPARKLY SILVER UNICORNS FROM THE OPENING CEREMONY ARE DANCING IN THE CROWD.
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 7:24am
A cèilidh to close us out
For those not fluent, this is a cèilidh (pronounced kay-lee). A Scottish country dance that's a mainstay of any Scottish celebration - weddings, schools, festivals.
So basically, the Scottish version of The Nutbush.
It's a bop, I've gotta say.
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 7:18am
And Glasgow 2026 is ... closed!
Prince Edward has officially closed the 2026 Glasgow Commonwealth Games.
But we're not done yet!
A few final performances before it's all over.
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 7:14am
If Glasgow was a green place, Amdavad might be every colour
What a treat we've got here as a preview to the city and culture that'll be on display in four years' time.
Bollywood singer Bhoomi Trivedi BELTED out some of her hits as a tribute to Gujarat, the state of the next host city.
The camera cut to the Indian team here and my word they were LOVING it.
How exciting for those athletes to celebrate a home Games in four years.
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 7:06am
Amdavad - a city of river and rhythm
That's how the next host city of the Commonwealth Games was described.
Whoa, what a crossover performance this is!
India's Rishab Rikhiram Sharma absolutely shredding on the sitar in one heck of a jam session with Scotland's Ross Ainslie doing the same on the pipes.
Not a crossover I'd expected, but I'm sure glad we got it!
Key Event
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 6:55am
The flag ... and the Games ... are in the hands of India
The Commonwealth Games flag just made its way from the Lord Provost of Glasgow, Jacqueline McLaren to the Deputy Chief Minister of Gujarat, Harsh Sanghavi.
It'll kick off the handover portion of this ceremony, where we'll get a bit of a flavour of Amdavad and the Games we'll see in four years time.
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 6:45am
Scotland's Melanie Woods wins the David Dixon Award
The hometown hero gets a HUGE cheer. She's the first Scottish athlete to ever win the award.
Woods won the Women's 1,500m T54 gold medal in a Commonwealth record time ... TWICE ... after the race had to be re-run after a dramatic crash in the first.
Here's what the David Dixon award means according to the Games:
The David Dixon Award is given to the outstanding athlete of the Commonwealth Games, based on their performance, fair play and overall contribution to their team's participation at the Games. The award is given every four years and is named after the former honorary secretary of the Commonwealth Games Federation, David Dixon.
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 6:39am
Time to officially close these Games
OK, we've paused the party just for the moment as we begin the official proceedings to close the Glasgow Commonwealth Games and hand the Commonwealth Games flag over to Amdavad.
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 6:37am
Fair bit of diplomacy that
Look, Glasgow did us a mighty solid in picking up these Games after Melbourne pulled the pin in 2023.
But lending them Delta to open up the closing ceremony LIKE THAT as a bit of an apology might just make up for it?
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 6:36am
Aussie cyclists hitting the road
The Australian men's sprinters and some of the endurance boys have just shuffled out.
Credit to the cyclists who turned up tonight after competing in some of the most physically taxing events of the Games just a few hours ago.
Mon 3 Aug 2026 at 6:31am
A love letter to Glasgow
I've got goosebumps listening to that piece from Scottish poet Jackie Kay.
Here's a little of her words in case you missed it:
We welcome the risk-taker, the refugee. We take to the streets for democracy. We meet our lovers under the Hielanman's Umbrella and exchange a kiss. Ae fon kiss.
This one is for Youse.
All of You.