In short:
Crown prosecutors say the severity of triple murderer Erin Patterson's crimes means the judge should not have allowed for the possibility that she'd one day be released on parole.
But lawyers for Patterson say the sentence was appropriate given the harshness of her prison life and the solitary confinement she endures there.
What's next?
Court of Appeal judges Leslie Taylor, Stephen McLeish and Peter Kidd have reserved judgements on both appeals.
Mushroom killer Erin Patterson should be locked up for life with no chance of parole because the three murders she carried out were in the "worst category", prosecutors say.
Patterson has been in court this week trying to overturn her conviction, in the hope of securing a re-trial.
Meanwhile, prosecutors have lodged their own appeal, seeking to make her jail term even harsher.
Last year, Patterson was found guilty of using a poisoned beef Wellington to murder in-laws Don and Gail Patterson, and Gail's sister Heather Wilkinson. She was also found guilty of attempting to murder Heather's husband Ian Wilkinson.
Justice Christopher Beale sentenced the Leongatha woman to life in jail, but included a 33-year non-parole period meaning she could walk free in late 2056.
The chance for parole was given because of Patterson's harsher-than-usual prison conditions, which included being housed in a small cell in solitary confinement.
Prosecutors say sentencing judge made error
Today, prosecutors told the Court of Appeal that Justice Beale fell into legal error when he ruled there was a "substantial chance" Patterson would be held in solitary for a long time.
"Given the unprecedented media coverage of your case ... you are likely to remain a notorious prisoner for many years to come, and, as such, remain at significant risk from other prisoners," Justice Beale ruled at the time.
Today the Director of Public Prosecutions, Brendan Kissane KC, said Corrections Victoria staff reviewed Patterson's conditions on a monthly basis.
She had the ability to request access to a library, to exercise and lounge facilities, and had a television and crochet items in her cell, he said.
Mr Kissane said Patterson's crimes fell into the "worst category". They compromised of three murders and an attempted murder, with the deadly mushroom lunch planned for weeks, he said.
He also said Patterson remained remorseless for her actions.
"This was offending of utmost cruelty involving enormous betrayal,"
"His Honour has fallen into error in the way he has dealt with [the] non-parole period."
But Patterson's barrister, Richard Edney, said the defence backed Justice Beale's sentence for the crimes Patterson was convicted of.
"He's clearly taken into account all relevant considerations," Mr Edney said.
"In our submission, the sentencing judge did everything right in this complex sentencing exercise."
Mr Edney said Ms Patterson would remain in confinement for "many years".
Crown prosecutors address arguments for overturning murder conviction
Earlier today, prosecutors defended their conduct during Patterson's trial in Morwell, after the defence appealed on seven grounds.
One appeal ground centred on jurors being placed in the same accommodation as police and prosecution staff during the closing stages of the trial. The other grounds related to complaints about evidence in the trial and the prosecution's conduct.
Patterson's lawyers criticised the way then-prosecutor Nanette Rogers SC questioned the Leongatha mother when she stepped into the witness box, arguing it was "unfair".
Prosecutor Jeremy McWilliams said Dr Rogers was required by law to ask detailed questions and directly put allegations to Patterson.
"Plainly we reject any suggestion that the prosecutor acted as anything other than a model administer of justice who was careful, thorough, fair and professional in all respects," Mr McWilliams said.
Mr McWilliams said also there was nothing wrong with how the prosecution used Patterson's Facebook messages, which included disparaging comments about her estranged husband Simon and his parents.
Mr McWilliams said the prosecution did not use the material to try to convince the jury that the messages proved a motive for murder. Instead, he said, it was evidence the jury could use to assess Patterson's relationship with her relatives.
"This was an overwhelming case," he said.
Court of Appeal judges Lesley Taylor, Stephen McLeish and Peter Kidd have reserved judgements on both appeals.