Mitchell Starc delivers once more but it's another left-arm seamer who delivers the ball of the series, as Test cricket is blessed with its 29th two-day match.
Here are the quick hits from day two of the second Test between Australia and Bangladesh.
1. Shoriful's ball of the series
It wouldn't have taken a rocket scientist to determine that Cam Green held the key for Australia at the start of day two.
The towering all-rounder, buoyed by his drought-breaking ton in Darwin, was once again looking precisely the player he had for so long promised to be.
With Green well set on 67 and clattering boundaries to either side of the wicket, it was going to take something special to remove the big man.
And Shoriful Islam, having already ripped through Australia's middle order late on day two, delivered something very, very special.
The left-armer's pinpoint yorker swung in late and dramatically, with Green falling over himself in a futile attempt to keep it out.
The ball thudded into the Australian's big toe on its way past the stumps and, after a brief consultation with DRS, was given out LBW to what was surely the ball of the series.
And that wasn't the end of the story for left-arm seamers on day two ...
2. Starc continues the left-arm carnage
Shoriful, who was almost inconceivably yanked from the bowling attack after that stunner against Green, ended the innings with figures of 7-48, the best-ever return for a Bangladeshi bowler while playing away from home.
Combine that with the 6-12 Mitchell Starc plundered early on day one, and left-arm seam had returned overall figures of 13-60, while accounting for 13 of the 20 wickets to fall in the match.
And it wasn't long before those numbers were improved even further.
He couldn't manage a wicket in his first set, but Starc struck with his eighth delivery of the innings, extracting some extra bounce to have Shadman Islam caught off a leading edge at point.
And the very next ball, Starc had his eighth of the match, having kissed the top of Mominul Haque's off stump with the Bangladeshi attempting an ill-advised leave.
An almost-customary double strike from Australia's supreme new-ball destroyer.
Starc eventually finished with figures of 4-39 for the innings and, with 10-51, the second-best match figures of his career.
3. Smith takes a screamer after tea
Tailender Taskin Ahmed had set himself well in the lead-up to the tea break, but he fell at the very first hurdle in the evening session.
Lyon's first delivery was a beauty, pitching and turning away from the leftie, who swung hard and found a healthy outside edge.
And Steve Smith, in place at his familiar position at slip, had to have his wits about him to complete a very good one-handed grab.
He's Test cricket's most prolific catcher for a reason, after all.
Taskin, who had provided perhaps Bangladesh's brightest spot in an otherwise pitch-black innings in swatting a massive six over long on in the shadows of tea, was out for 7.
4. The shortest session ever?
With Shoriful in at No. 11, the end was very clearly nigh in Mackay.
However, Shoriful showed in the first innings that he had at least some ability with the bat, top scoring with a rather frenetic 14 from 19 deliveries.
He survived the first ball of his second dig, defending Lyon out into the off side.
But it was all over with the very next ball.
Shoriful had a big swing at one, caught a thick outside edge and ballooned a dolly out to Starc at point, with Australia's superlative spearhead fittingly bringing the match to an end.
With two wickets falling in just three balls, it had to be close to the shortest non-weather-affected session in Test history.
5. The 29th two-day Test
There have been 2,632 Test matches played in cricket's lengthy red-ball history, with 457 of them held in Australia.
As of today, there have been just 29 finish inside two days.
Only five of those have happened in Australia.
And yet, in the last 20 Tests that have been played on these shores, it has happened four times.
Australia thumped South Africa on a Gabba green top in 2022, and then there were two, two-day Tests during last summer's Ashes, one in Perth and the other at the MCG.
The only Australia-hosted Test to finish inside two days before that game in Brisbane four years ago took place in Melbourne against the West Indies, in February 1931.
Eleven of the two-day Tests in history took place before World War I (between 1882 and 1912), a further three either side of World War II (1931-1946) but then none between 1946 and 1999.
Then, since 2000, there have been 13 two-day Tests. The cost of a fast-paced world, perhaps.