Geelong defeats Collingwood by 25 points at the MCG to set up finals tilt
Geelong burst out of the gates and then held off Collingwood's fightback to record a critical 25-point win at the MCG.
The Cats got out to a 49-point lead before the Magpies started to whittle the lead down, but never got closer than three-goals as Geelong saw the game out professionally.
Collingwood also lost Jeremy Howe to a broken arm in the third quarter and Harry Perryman to a hamstring strain earlier in the match.
Follow the live blog below, keep up to date with all the latest stats in our ScoreCentre, and tune in to our live radio coverage.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 7:35pm
Magpies vs Cats live
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 11:07pm
That's where we'll leave the blog tonight
First game of round 21 down, and it's all good news for the Cats. We'll be back tomorrow for another corker as the league-leading Dockers take on the Bulldogs over in Perth.
Thanks for your company tonight, see you again tomorrow I hope.
Key Event
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 11:02pm
Jeremy Howe set for operation on broken arm
Craig McRae has just revealed the extent of Jeremy Howe's injury, and it doesn't sound great.
"Howie has unfortunately got a fracture in his arm around the same place he had that fracture before. He's off to hospital.
"I've been told it's at the minor end, but he's probably going to need an operation. We'll know more in the next few hours."
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 10:59pm
Match report: Cats roll Magpies to move into top five
Fast-starting Geelong has withstood a Collingwood surge to claim a 25-point win and climb into the AFL top six.
The Cats nabbed five goals to one in the first quarter and nine of the first 10 to set themselves up and led by as much as 49 early in the second term.
But Collingwood responded, kicking five goals on the spin to claw its way back into the game before Geelong settled to win 15.7 (97) to 10.12 (72) at the MCG and snap the Magpies' six-game winning run.
Geelong tagger Oisin Mullin went to Magpies gun Nick Daicos while Cats star Bailey Smith (28 disposals) had Ed Allan for company
Daicos had 12 disposals in the opening term but few in attacking spaces, while the Cats dominated.
Teammate Harry Perryman (left hamstring) was forced off in the second term while Jeremy Howe (arm) came off at three-quarter time.
Geelong's Ollie Dempsey (29 disposals and two goals) was sensational, Tom Stewart (25 possessions) was influential, while James Worpel (10 clearances), Smith and Tom Atkins were all busy.
In Jeremy Cameron, Max Holmes and Patrick Dangerfield's absence, forwards Ollie Henry (three goals), Shannon Neale (two) and Jay Polkinghorne (three) helped the Cats compile a winning score.
Howe worked hard defensively along with Josh Daicos (33 disposals) and Isaac Quaynor, while Dan McStay (five goals) and Beau McCreery (two) gave the Magpies a spark.
AAP
Key Event
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 10:33pm
Oisin Mullin goes in depth into his Nick Daicos battle
Oisin Mullin has just been speaking on Fox Footy about his one-on-one match-up with Nick Daicos tonight. We'll probably call that battle a draw too, because Daicos got heaps of the ball but probably without the damage that we are used to, and Mullin had a few good moments the other way too. It was certainly fun to watch.
In unrelated news, Oisin Mullin is comfortably the most charming man in the AFL. Anyway, here is what he had to say.
"It's pretty simple really, just follow [Nick] around. He's the best in the game at what he does, so it becomes a dance. We're both reacting to what the other one does. It's back and forth, and then it's teammates on both sides helping out.
"We all take accountability for a match-up like that. He got away from me a few times, but he's going to get away from whoever is on him. He's just that good.
"He's very explosive and his endurance is elite. Trying to stay with him, it's a mental battle really to see who's going to give in first.
"[Winning my own ball] is something I'm trying to evolve. From my perspective, every touch he gets is frustrating. So I try to flip that, and if I get a touch I hope it's going to frustrate him as well. Hopefully it puts me in the back of his head slightly, instead of him just doing his own thing."
Key Event
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 10:08pm
FT: Geelong 15.7 (97) def Collingwood 10.12 (72)
The Cats won it in the contest, burst out of the gates in the first 45 minutes of the game to establish a winning lead and then slowly ground the Pies down as they tried to put a comeback together.
Without Jeremy Cameron, Max Holmes, Patrick Dangerfield and a few others, the Cats still performed as an incredibly well-drilled unit. This is such an experienced and mature side, it really is next man up when these superstars go out. The Pies had been in red hot form, but the Geelong defence was sensational all over the ground.
Collingwood will bemoan a half-hour stretch early in the match which cost the game. They will look at the clearance numbers and be concerned, but there was enough in that game for them to like. And yet they never really got close. With Perryman and Howe injured as well, there is some real concern going into these final weeks.
Geelong are up into fifth place. The top four will be hard to crack into, but if the Cats can swerve the wildcard week they'd be delighted. They're now in a great spot to do just that.
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 10:06pm
Dan McStay sneaks in a fifth goal
Muted celebrations, but it's a big night for McStay. A handful of goals just reward for his efforts this evening.
Into the final minute of this game.
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 10:01pm
Jay Polkinghorne ices the game! Cats are home
Just too much to do for the Pies. They've kept rolling the dice but the numbers aren't coming up anymore.
A repeat entry inside 50 finds Polkinghorne at the front of the pack, and his third goal puts this one to bed. The Cats will win, and the Cats will deserve to win.
It's out to 31 points with four minutes to play.
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 9:58pm
Oli Wiltshire! Surely the Cats are home
Every time the Pies threaten, the Cats put them back away. It must be starting to get demoralising for the Pies who just can't get any closer.
Brilliant snap from Wiltshire too. The Cats force it forward into the pocket and a touch of class finishes it off.
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 9:57pm
Dan McStay kicks his fourth. Maybe?
There's still 6:46 on the clock, and the lead is now a flat three goals. Plenty of time, in theory.
Great mark from McStay in from the side, one of the rare occasions the big Cats defenders weren't on hand to nullify the threat. Goal had to be kicked to keep this game alive, and McStay drills it.
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 9:53pm
Ollie Henry somehow kicks a big goal for the Cats!
Moments ago Jack Crisp had a crucial set shot, which he missed. The Cats take it straight up the other end, and thanks to an absolute shank from Henry which somehow dipped and wobbled and rolled through, the lead is now 25 and almost comfortable.
Henry has kicked three, and they've all been weird.
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 9:50pm
Ten minutes to play
It's a 20-point game, and a very even one at that. The Pies are giving as good as they're getting, but they'll need to get a move on if they're to pull this back.
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 9:47pm
Jeremy Howe is out of the game
It's an arm injury, apparently. Hopefully not related to the horrible arm injury he suffered last season.
Collingwood down two now, with Perryman also out of action after suffering a hamstring injury early in the game.
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 9:44pm
Jay Polkinghorne bends through another for the Cats
Goal for goal in the last so far, and as Collingwood continue to take risks with the ball out of defence, so these opportunities will arise for the Cats.
Turned over at half-back, it ended up with Miers. His clever little left-footed pass found Polkinghorne in the pocket, and his snap was a beauty. Something about this fella.
It's 22 points, 15 minutes to play.
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 9:40pm
Dan McStay with a quick response for Collingwood
The Pies waste no time and find a goal from a centre bounce for the first time tonight. Really just hacked forward out of the contest by De Goey, and McStay had just enough time when he crumbed to wheel around and snap the goal.
Back to 18, most of the last quarter still to play.
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 9:39pm
Shannon Neale converts for the Cats
He's been threatening all night and was simply too big on that occasion. Neale read Mannagh's hurried kick to the hot spot best and took a strong mark before converting.
First goal was important and Geelong have claimed it. The lead is back to 24, and things feel a little better for the Cats.
Key Event
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 9:29pm
3QT: Geelong 10.5 (65) leads Collingwood 7.6 (48)
Geelong are dominating the inside 50s (49-34) and dominating the clearances (41-24), and yet Collingwood have slowly whittled this lead down to a manageable level with a quarter to play.
Forced to take risks by the massive lead they coughed up, the Pies have been at their best when they've been forcing the issue. They're going to go down swinging, and if the Cats try to sit back and hold onto what they have, it probably won't end well.
The stats say that the Cats should see this out. The noise around the MCG right now says something else.
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 9:27pm
Dan McStay has his second for the Magpies
In these late stages of the third quarter, that one is worth its wait in gold. Tom Atkins tried to weave through a couple of tackles in the defensive 50 but was nailed by McStay. A little stiff, but the second tackle always gets pinged.
It's 17 points with 47 seconds to play in this term. Time for one more?
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 9:20pm
Jack Martin kicks a settler for the Cats
They really needed that. It's been nearly an hour since the last Geelong goal, but from Martin's boot comes a goal which might just slow the Collingwood momentum a little.
Neat kick forward from Neale found Martin on the lead and he held his nerve. Back to 22 points, 6:30 to play in the third.
Thu 30 Jul 2026 at 9:14pm
Harvey Harrison makes it five in a row for Collingwood!
Yep, it's on now! The Pies are taking risks with these kicks through the middle and they are coming off. Crisp was aggressive again, and Nick Daicos finished it off with the pass to Harrison.
Brilliant set shot finish from Harrison too. It's back to 16. It once was 49.