Commonwealth Games updates: Cameron McEvoy creates history as Australia's Glasgow gold rush continues
Cameron McEvoy's Glasgow double whammy has him looking to Los Angeles with confidence as he headlined another big night for Australia's Commonwealth Games swim team.
The sprint ace dominated the 50 metre freestyle final, going under 21 seconds for only the second time.
McEvoy's Games-record 20.97 followed his 20.88 world record in March and continued his remarkable swimming renaissance.
He led home an Australian medal sweep in the event - one of five swimming gold medals on day three - but the time was the bigger deal ahead of defending his Olympic title at the Los Angeles Olympics.
It is McEvoy's first individual gold medal at his third Commonwealth Games.
"It [gold] is really good, but I'm more excited about ducking under the 21-second barrier," he said.
"So, yeah, a double whammy for me. It was a really good night.
"I really wanted to prove to myself that I can consistently get under that [21 seconds]. So to do that for a second time, that brings me a lot of confidence for the world championships next year, LA, moving forward.
"I already know that there's some low-hanging fruit that I can knock off."
After a disappointing Tokyo Olympics, McEvoy took a sabbatical and nearly left the sport. He completely overhauled his training and returned for a stunning Paris triumph in the 50m freestyle.
"Prior to Paris, I still had the, I guess ... the demons to work with in terms of my Olympic relationship," he said.
Flynn Southam won silver and Jamie Jack was third to complete the Australian sweep.
Just as McEvoy continued to rule the one-lap dash, Lani Pallister remained similarly untouchable in distance freestyle events at the Games and turned the 1500m into a personal time trial and her second Glasgow gold.
After taking out the 400m on day one, Pallister won the 1,500 by nearly 18 seconds as the women's event made its debut at the Games.
But there was no Australian procession in the men's 4x200m freestyle final.
For once, it was a genuine race and England led at the last change before Kai Taylor's blistering anchor leg delivered the last gold medal of day three and another Games record.
Sam Short, Harry Turner, Ed Sommerville and Taylor clocked seven minutes 1.47 seconds to break the Games record Australia set in Birmingham.
Iona Anderson had an emotional hug with her Scottish grandmother after winning the 100m backstroke while opening ceremony baton bearer Tim Hodge successfully defended his Games 100m backstroke S9 title.
Australian swimmers have now collected 16 gold medals in three days, entrenching their country atop the overall Games medal standings.
Also on day three, Australian Matthew Temple suffered a bad case of deja vu, again losing to Canadian star Josh Liendo in a record-breaking 100m butterfly final.
Gemma Sellick (silver) and Victoria Belando Nicholson (bronze) won medals behind England's Alice Tai in the women's 100m backstroke S9 and Harrison Vig won bronze behind Hodge in the backstroke.
Sienna Toohey was third in the 100m breaststroke, while Mollie O'Callaghan, Meg Harris and Shayna Jack were the fastest three 100m freestyle semi-finalists.
Similarly, Alex Perkins and Brittany Casteluzzo were quickest in the 100m butterfly semis.
Scott scores silver ahead of 'idol' Godwin
Australia's star gymnast Georgia Godwin has failed to defend her individual all-around title, but teammate Breanna Scott took silver.
All eyes were on defending champion Godwin, but it was Scott who led the charge for Australia as Canadian great Ellie Black won gold at Glasgow International Stadium.
Black's 16-year-old teammate Lia-Monica Fontaine followed for bronze, while Godwin settled for fifth after guiding Australia to a team gold the day before.
"It's pretty crazy. I don't really think it's sunk in yet," Scott said.
"There's been so much that's happened in the last 24 hours."
The Sydney local credited Godwin and Black for pushing her to the limit in Glasgow.
"They're both like such great role models. Georgia is like basically all of our idols in the team,"Scott said.
"We look up to her. She's just so great to have there.
"She's the most supportive person like you could have on the team.
"And obviously Ellie, like she's like an icon of the sport so it was really great to be competing with both of them."
Stealing the headlines after winning two gold and three silver medals at the 2022 Birmingham Games, Godwin was aiming to become the first gymnast in Games history to successfully defend an individual all-around title.
But the tight turnaround proved too much for the 28-year-old, who readily admitted she was struggling with soreness after the team final in her comeback from an Achilles injury.
Godwin had become the nation's most decorated female gymnast at the Games after winning the team gold, surpassing Allana Slater with nine total medals.
The Queensland product will have another chance to win a medal in Glasgow when she competes in the vault and floor finals.
Scott's silver medal comes after Australia's leading male gymnast, Jesse Moore, ended the nation's 16-year medal drought by claiming individual all-around bronze.
Catch up on the full day of coverage in the blog below.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Recap
Here are the Australian gold medals from today:
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 9:00am
Bye for now!
How sensational was day three?
More medals, more fun and more Aussie spirit.
We'll be back tonight for day four to do it all over again and we've got a jam-packed schedule to look forward to.
The athletics finally gets underway while Mollie O'Callaghan, Shayna Jack and Meg Harris will try go for back-to-back podium sweeps for Australia in the women's 100m freestyle.
Here's everything you've got to look forward to:
- 3x3 basketball/wheelchair basketball
- Artistic gymnastics
- Athletics
- Bowls
- Boxing
- Swimming
- Weightlifting
Pete, Jon and I are going to get some much needed rest so bye for now and catch you next time.
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 8:45am
A big day for Australia
It was medals galore on day three, with a total of 17 Aussies on the podium.
We had:
- 6 gold
- 4 silver
- 7 bronze
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 8:25am
I can't imagine jumping that high in the air to land on a thin beam
The athleticism it takes to be a gymnast is out of this world.
Australian Breanna Scott walked away with a silver medal in the women's all-around final, just behind Ellie Black of Canada.
She pulled out an impressive 13.900 on beam, the highest score on that apparatus of the day.
Scott will be back in the individual apparatus finals later this week on the uneven bars.
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 8:06am
Found lifeless in the water, Vicky is now a swimming medallist
When athlete details are listed, Vicky Belando Nicholson's birthplace is "unknown".
We don't know where her journey to Glasgow began, but we do know one of the earliest, terrifying moments when a young baby was pulled lifeless from the Mediterranean after falling off a refugee boat in 2008.
Now, she's a 100m backstroke S9 bronze medallist at the Commonwealth Games.
My colleague Jon Healy, who is in Glasgow, has shared her story of courage and resilience.
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 7:51am
If you just woke up, here's what you missed
It's hard to keep on top of all the events at the Commonwealth Games, especially as most things happen while you're asleep.
But thankfully for you, the ABC Sport desk is working allll the way through the night to bring you all the action from Glasgow.
If you haven't kept up to date with the major results from overnight, here's what you need to know:
- Jesse Moore became the first Australian man in 16 years to win a gymnastics medal after claiming bronze in the all-round competition
- The Diamonds were clinical in their game against England, beating them 66-47
- Breanna Scott pulled something special out in the women's all-round gymnastics final, claiming a silver medal
- Cam McEvoy became the first person to swim 50m freestyle under 21 seconds twice. He took home a lovely gold medal alongside two teammates, Flynn Southam and Jamie Jack
- Another medal rush in the pool. Too many to name but just scroll back through the blog and you'll see!
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 7:33am
📸Medals from day three
Some extra luggage to take home for these Aussies.
Key Event
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 7:19am
Medal tally: Can't hear you from the top of the podium
Victory is oh, so sweet.
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 7:10am
Two wins from Australia in the 3x3 basketball
The Gangurrus - women and the men - notched a couple of big wins to finish the day over in the 3x3 basketball.
The women beat Uganda 21-9, with 11 points from Amy Atwell, to stay unbeaten in their pool for the Games so far.
The men were too good for the Cayman Islands, winning 21-5 with Sam McDaniel the leading scorer for Australia with 12. They're also unbeaten and sit atop pool A.
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 6:55am
Happiness vs heartbreak
Totally contrasting emotions here in this photo.
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 6:46am
Glasgow gold better than Victorian victory for Iona Anderson
Iona Anderson emerged as Australia's biggest backstroke star of these Games when Kaylee McKeown withdrew due to glandular fever.
In the 200m, she swam the third best time of her life, but finished well outside the medals.
In the 100m tonight, she touched first and it could not have been a better place for her first individual gold medal at a senior meet.
Yes, even better than doing it on home soil in regional Victoria, as was the initial plan.
"Personally, for me, I think Glasgow's better than Victoria. Sorry," she says.
Basically, her entire family is from Scotland, Grangemouth on her mum's side and Dumfries and Galloway on her dad's. She's only been back four times in her life, so this is a pretty remarkable moment for the 20-year-old.
"I love the Scottish. I've got quite a few friends here and obviously my family. So it was great to come back here and do it," she said.
She was even named after the small island of Iona off the west coast of Scotland.
Gee, let's hope she doesn't pull a Matthew Richardson on us.
Key Event
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 6:38am
🥇AUSTRALIA STORM HOME TO WIN 4X200M RELAY
Kai Taylor has half a body length in front!!
50M TO GO AND IT LOOKS LIKE HE WILL BRING IT HOME.
LET'S GO KAI!!
AUSTRALIA STORM HOME TO WIN THE 4X200 MEN'S FREESTYLE RELAY IN A GAMES RECORD. TAKE A BOW, LADS.
The English really took it to the Australian boys but what an impressive final leg from Taylor. His split was a 1:44.10 ... wow, wow, wow.
Hats off to Sam Short, Harrison Turner and Edward Sommerville as well, fantastic result.
Speaking to Seven after the race, all the boys spoke about how big of an honour it was to stand together and win together.
"The boys set me up really nicely and I knew I had them behind me, cheering me on, especially in the last 50m when I needed them most," Taylor says.
Here's how the podium looks:
🥇Australia: 7:01.47
🥈England: 7:04.98
🥉Wales: 7:09.59
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 6:36am
SOOO CLOSE IN THE 4X200M RELAY
England have caught up and take the lead with James Guy! What a 200m from the Englishman.
KAI TAYLOR NEEDS TO COMPOSE HIMSELF HERE! AND HE IS IN THE WATER!
TAYLOR HAS GAINED! We are practically neck and neck.
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 6:34am
Australia takes the lead!
Harrison Turner now gives Australia the lead in front of England but it's close after the first 100m of this second leg.
He is holding on! The roars are soooo loud in the arena!
Turner just touches the wall in front for Edward Sommerville to dive in.
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 6:32am
We're away in the relay!
Sam Short starts us off and he's up there in the first 100m, turning in second behind Wales.
For Short, this is probably his hardest event. He really excels in the longer distances.
We touch the wall in second position after the first leg.
Here goes Harrison Turner into the water!
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 6:27am
Relay to finish us off in the pool
Last event in the pool coming up with the men's 4x200m freestyle relay final.
Australia qualified quickest in this event and honestly, it looks like they'll have no competition for the gold medal.
The closest will be Scotland who clocked a time of 7:17.18 in the heats, nine seconds behind the green and gold.
Here's how we're lining up:
- Sam Short
- Harrison Turner
- Edward Sommerville (only swimmer who was also in the heats)
- Kai Taylor
Key Event
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 6:24am
🥇 GOLD FOR PALLISTER AND 🥉BRONZE FOR WALKER IN THE 1500M FREESTLYE
UTTER. DOMINANCE.
From the moment she left the blocks Lani Pallister took the lead and didn't let go.
It's Pallister and then DAYLIGHT to the rest of the field. WOW.
AND THEN A 12-SECOND PB FROM MOLLY WALKER TO SNAG THE 🥉BROZNE! ADD 'EM TO MEDAL MOUNTAIN!
Tiana Krtizinger touched the wall in sixth position.
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 6:20am
Pallister extends the lead with 500m to go
Pallister's coach Dean Boxall is out of his seat and helping steer his swimmer home with directions.
This is really Pallister's race to lose from here, she's pushing even further ahead.
COME ON LANI!!!!
Molly Walker is also in bronze medal spot as well. Could be a double podium coming up!
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 6:17am
Pallister in a commanding lead at the 750m mark
At the halfway mark, it's Pallister from New Zealand's Fairweather and Aussie Walker.
Pallister has really thrown down the gauntlet here in the opening 800m and DARED the rest of the field to come get her, even sneaking under world record pace for the early laps.
She's ahead by nearly HALF A LAP from the nearest challenger so far.
HUGE FINISH COMING UP.
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 6:08am
The women's 1500m freestyle final is here
Three Aussies in the mix here. Molly Walker, Lani Pallister and Tiana Kritzinger.
After the madness of the previous race ... settle in for this one folks. It's a massive test of endurance.
Key Event
Mon 27 Jul 2026 at 6:05am
🥇CAM MCEVOY WITH A GOLD!!! AUSSIES SWEEP 50M FREE
I am on the edge of my seat!!
A wall of white water is across the pool.
CAM MCEVOY HAS A MASSIVE LEAD WHICH IS CRAZY FOR A 50M AND THIS LOOKS INCREDIBLY EASY FOR HIM!!
GOLD FOR THE FASTEST MAN IN THE WORLD WITH A 20.97 AND A GAMES RECORD!
He has completed the trifecta! He's a world champion, an Olympic champion, and now a Commonwealth Games champion.
We also have a clean sweep in the 50m freestyle final with Flynn Southam posting a 21.44 and debut Jamie Jack in third with a 21.47. That is some good, good stuff.
Here's what all three had to say after the race:
"I am so happy to do it with these two boys, its pretty awesome," Flynn says.
"My first team and first international medal, its an honour," Jack says.
And how about this Avengers reference from our winner.
"It's nice, I feel like I have collected all the infinity stones. I probably won it in the dive, as simple as that," McEvoy says.
"To sweep the podium with these boys ... the depth in Australia is amazing."
His time was outside his world record of 20.88, but that start was sensational. A reaction time off the blocks of 0.55 is extraordinary.
"His reaction time completely obliterated the rest of the field alone," Giaan Rooney said of McEvoy.