In short:
Israel's embassy has released a lengthy complaint ahead of Labor's national conference on the party's proposed position on Israel and Palestine.
Labor will consider adopting a more detailed position on the conflict, including on issues like illegal settlements and the death penalty, to replace the platform's previous call for recognition of a Palestinian state.
What's next?
The four-page statement to the media takes issue with multiple elements of the draft, which will be debated by the party later this week.
Israel's embassy in Australia has strongly criticised Labor's draft national platform, arguing it places too much responsibility for ongoing conflict on Israel and not enough on Palestinian leaders, or Hamas.
The draft platform will be put to delegates at the national conference in Adelaide this week, and significantly expands Labor's position on the status of Israel and Palestine.
The existing 2023 national platform primarily called on Labor to recognise a Palestinian state, which the Albanese government did in September last year alongside countries like Canada and the United Kingdom.
The new draft introduces a more detailed position on Israel and Palestine, including opposition to Israeli "illegal settlement activity" and settler violence, and condemnation of recent Israeli laws approving the death penalty for Palestinians who murder Israelis.
It also includes support for the International Court of Justice (ICJ) and International Criminal Court (ICC), which has issued an arrest warrant for Israel's prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu.
The draft includes a line "unreservedly condemn[ing] terrorism and violent extremism, including as perpetrated by Hamas".
But unlike previous platforms, it contains little that calls Labor governments to concrete actions like recognition, other than suggesting sanctions "as necessary" on illegal settlements.
In a four-page statement to the media, Israel's embassy has taken issue with multiple elements of the draft platform.
It contends that Israeli settlements are not violating international law, as borders between Israel and a Palestinian state are "final-status issues to be resolved through direct negotiations".
It describes settler violence as illegal behaviour but also a "marginal phenomenon".
"In contrast to Palestinian attacks on Israelis, which continue frequently and are not even condemned by the PA, Israel condemns any vigilante attacks and acts to bring them to justice," it said.
"In most cases, settler violence targets possessions while Palestinian violence aspires to murder or injure Israelis."
And it continues Israel's criticism of Australia's recognition of a Palestinian state.
"Such recognition does not bring the sides closer but only distances them from one another," it said.
"Recognition in the absence of genuine reform strengthens the radicals, is perceived as a reward for terrorism, and sends a message that terrorism and intransigence pay off."
The statement takes significant issue with the draft platform's stance on the ICC and ICJ, arguing "both bodies are politicised and maintain a disproportionate focus on the Jewish state".
It broadly argues Labor's draft stance is one-sided.
"[Israel] remains committed to a future in which Israelis and Palestinians live alongside one another in peace and security," the statement reads.
"That future, however, cannot be built through unilateral political declarations or international pressure directed at only one side."
Palestine advocates call for stronger stance
The Australian Palestinian Advocacy Network (APAN) has made its own suggestions for Labor's national platform, calling on the party to take a much stronger stance on the issue.
It wants to see stronger commitments around Australia's defence exports to Israel and further action on illegal settlements, among other suggestions.
"This conference is the moment Labor can choose to draw a clear red line on Australian complicity," said APAN executive officer Katie Shammas.
"That means ending defence exports that risk contributing to atrocities, confronting the illegal settlement enterprise, and ensuring Australia meets its obligations under international law."
The federal government has repeatedly insisted it is not manufacturing any ammunition or weapons and exporting it to Israel, and has not done so for more than five years.
The office of Foreign Minister Penny Wong was contacted for comment on Israel's concerns.
Asked about Israel's complaints, Minister for International Development and Multicultural Affairs Anne Aly said she had yet to see them in full.
But she said the conference would see the proposal fully debated.
"The Israeli embassy can put out what they want to say," she said.
"But the conference is about the Labor Party coming together and settling on our platform and having those robust discussions during the conference in a very democratic way."