In short:
A report into bullying, discrimination and harassment in schools has been tabled in Tasmanian parliament.
The report focused on faith-based schools, finding that Catholic Education Tasmania discriminated against staff based on sexual orientation and marital status.
What's next?
It made 33 recommendations, including a blanket call for "all schools" to implement anti-discrimination and anti-bullying policies, and for the state to review its anti-discrimination legislation.
A two-year-long parliamentary inquiry into bullying and discrimination within Tasmanian schools has published its final report, with its chair declaring that "at the heart of this inquiry is pain".
But despite the inquiry's broad range, chair and Labor MP Brian Mitchell said he predicted the public focus would be on the committee's findings on the bullying and discrimination faced by LGBTIQA+ students in the state's Catholic schools.
The inquiry was initiated by independent MP Kristie Johnston in June 2024, following the release of national data that found Tasmania had the highest rates of schoolyard bullying in the country.
Among its 55 findings, the final report found Catholic Education Tasmania, which operates 39 Tasmanian schools, discriminated against staff based on sexual orientation and marital status, contravening the state anti-discrimination laws - but noted the assertion has not been determined in court.
"There will be criticism from some quarters that the inquiry has focused too intently on Catholic education and targets religious freedom, etc", Mr Mitchell said.
"Such criticism is simplistic, unfair and untrue."
The criticism Mr Mitchell anticipated emerged within the report itself, with two inquiry committee members, Tasmanian government MPs Michael Ferguson and Mark Shelton, issuing a joint dissenting statement.
While the two MPs strongly agreed that every student should be safe at school, they were concerned the report went too far in responding to discrimination and bullying with respect to gender identity and faith-based education.
"Faith-based education should not be misrepresented as though religious beliefs (Christian or otherwise) and student wellbeing are at odds with each other,"
Labor member Anita Dow, Greens member Vica Bayley, and independents Ms Johnston and Helen Burnet also sat on the committee.
Calls for anti-discrimination laws to be reviewed
The inquiry was established with a scope to report on discrimination, bullying and harassment in Tasmanian schools; to examine the impact of discrimination and bullying on a student's educational outcome; and to determine whether legislative or policy reforms are needed.
The report, which was delayed due to a snap state election last year, detailed the "real and persistent" discrimination and harassment within the state's education system.
It found bullying, harassment and discrimination remained significant issues within schools, despite the anti-bullying policies in place across the sector.
It highlighted shortcomings in support, training, mental health care, data collection and policy. The report also noted LGBTIQA+ students and students with disabilities were disproportionately affected by bullying, harassment and discrimination.
The report made 33 recommendations, including a blanket call for "all schools" to implement anti-discrimination and anti-bullying policies, and for the state to review its anti-discrimination legislation.
The inquiry received 294 submissions, and heard from 47 witnesses over seven public hearings and several confidential hearings.
Many of the submissions were sent from parents with children attending "a Christian school", and whose submissions appeared to have been prepared by the website OneClickPolitics.
The website states it provides "innovative and easy-to-use digital solutions to amplify your advocates' voices with the goal of impacting policy outcomes".
Employment practices lawful, school body says
Mr Mitchell said the inquiry had not been a review into the merits or otherwise of faith-based education.
"It is simply a fact that evidence was presented relating to the negative experiences of young LGBTIQA+ people in faith-based, particularly Catholic, schools," he said.
Among those the inquiry heard from was Sam Johnstone, a former deputy principal of Marist Regional College in Burnie, who told the inquiry he was stood down from the Catholic secondary school after disclosing a de facto relationship.
It also heard from a Year 12 transgender girl, Amilie Courtney, who attended the Catholic co-educational St Patrick's College in Launceston.
She told the inquiry she had been the subject of segregation and bullying, describing herself as "a problem to be managed, separated and restricted".
Catholic Education Tasmania told the parliamentary inquiry that it denies senior leadership positions to staff who aren't in "regular" relationships or who are homosexual.
It said it was protected under, and compliant with, the federal Sex Discrimination Act.
The LGBTIQA+ advocacy group Equality Tasmania said at the time it was concerned this was in breach of the state's anti-discrimination laws.
The report found Tasmanian and Commonwealth anti-discrimination legislation "operate concurrently, with their application into matters of employment in faith-based schools not yet determined before a court of law".
Ms Johnston said the finding that Catholic Education Tasmania discriminated against staff on the basis of sexual orientation and marital status was a test for the state government.
"Will it stand by its gold-class anti-discrimination legislation and take up the fight on behalf of Tasmanians experiencing discrimination, because in Tasmania we don't discriminate," Mr Johnston said.
"Will it stand up to the Catholic church?"
Equality Tasmania spokesperson Rodney Croome and Ms Johnston said they would refer the report to Tasmania's anti-discrimination commissioner.
In a statement, Catholic Education Tasmania said it would continue to review and improve its educational environments and support systems for students, family and staff.
Its executive director, Dr Terry McCarthy, said he was confident the organisation's employment practices were lawful.