In short:
A second coronial inquest is being held after the first in 1980 failed to determine who was responsible for the disappearance and death of 14-year-old Marilyn Wallman.
A request to reopen the inquest in 1988 was rejected due to missing evidence relating to convicted sex offender Michael Anthony Frances, who was interviewed several times.
Frances, who died in 2020, kept diaries from 1971, but a section surrounding the dates of Marilyn's disappearance had apparently been torn out.
An attempt to reopen an inquest into the disappearance of Mackay schoolgirl Marilyn Wallman failed in 1988 because evidence linked to a sex offender had disappeared.
Fourteen-year-old Marilyn disappeared soon after 7:42am on March 21, 1972, after cycling a kilometre down a dirt road to catch a school bus.
A fragment of her skull was found in October 1974 in bushland at McGregor Creek, about 40 kilometres from where she was last seen.
The current inquest has heard that a convicted repeat sex offender, Michael Anthony Frances, who died in Victoria in 2020, was in Mackay when she went missing.
Counsel assisting Coroner David O'Connell, John Aberdeen, said Frances was first arrested in Mackay in 1974 after falling through the ceiling of a women's change room at Eimeo Beach.
"When he was apprehended at Eimeo riding his landlady's scooter, found on the scooter were also a woman's dress, halter top, brazier, panties and two false breasts," Mr Aberdeen said.
The inquest heard Frances dropped a notebook in the change room that referred to other sexual assaults, including one at the Mackay School of Arts where he wrote he had "got a young girl".
Police located a crime report that fit the scenario, and he was arrested after admitting his guilt.
"It seems Mr Frances kept a record of what he had been up to,"
Mr Aberdeen said.
A search of his house found diaries, notebooks and a mud map with references to Marilyn Wallman, along with 400 pieces of women's underwear he "snow dropped" from clotheslines.
Mr Aberdeen said Frances kept diaries from 1971, but a section surrounding the dates of Marilyn's disappearance had apparently been torn out.
Evidence existed until 1976
The diaries, notebooks and mud map were still in police evidence in 1976, as it was referenced in a statement from a new detective who was briefed on Marilyn's disappearance.
"Detective Mitchelson gave evidence that he located a mud map, drawing or sketch of an area in Eimeo which featured roads which matched the area of Wallmans Rd and Eimeo Road," Mr Aberdeen said.
"He noted that on that sketch was written the initials MW."
He said "not surprisingly", Frances's possible involvement in Marilyn Wallman's disappearance was seen as a distinct possibility, and he was questioned by homicide detectives.
Mr Aberdeen said Frances claimed entries in his books and diaries were in general not referable to any particular person.
When questioned, Frances claimed he was home when Marilyn disappeared, waiting for a phone call about a new job in the railway.
Mr Aberdeen said the diaries and mud map no longer existed.
He said reports indicated they were stored in a locked "steel press" at Mackay police station but that the CIB and exhibit room had since changed.
"Quite simply, Your Honour, no one knows what happened to those documents after 1976."
In 1987, Daphne Wallman told police underwear had disappeared from her bedroom drawer in the 12 months before Marilyn disappeared; however, she was never shown the underwear Frances was found with.
The inquest heard Frances had a record of violent sexual offending against young women, including abduction, sexual assault, assault with intent to rape and detaining by force.
Inquest rejected
Mr Aberdeen said police requested to reopen the inquest in 1988, but the coroner rejected this due to the missing evidence.
The coroner referred his decision to the under-secretary of the Department of Justice and later the Crown Law Office, as well as the Director of Public Prosecutions, who supported his view that there was insufficient evidence.
"It should be specifically mentioned that Coroner Bradshaw said had the map been available it would have provided the necessary evidence as it established a provable link between Marilyn and Mr Frances."
Car in sand dunes
Mr Aberdeen said Frances first came to police notice two days after Marilyn's disappearance when he was found in the sand hills north of Mackay Harbour by a search party.
Searchers came across a Wolseley car and Frances, who said he was there digging sand for his landlady's garden.
Mr Aberdeen said that despite the encounter being logged in the police "running sheet", it was two years later, in 1974, that police checked anything to do with the vehicle despite having its complete registration number.
By this time, Frances had sold the car, which had been stripped and used in a kindergarten playground at Bluff in central Queensland and could not be forensically examined.
The inquest is expected to hear from more than 20 witnesses over the next two weeks.