Commonwealth Games updates: Davies, Hull deliver classic finish in women's 5,000m after cyclists grab three gold
Australian Rose Davies has made Commonwealth Games track history with her second gold medal in Glasgow.
Davies roared to a landmark track triumph, becoming the first woman ever to complete the 5,000m and 10,000m double.
The Newcastle-born 26-year-old dropped to her knees in joy after winning the shorter distance at Scotstoun Stadium on Friday morning after a battle royale with her Australian teammate, Jessica Hull.
In a glorious finale, the two Australians took control of the race in a last-lap dust-up, with Olympic 1,500m silver medallist Hull looking poised to strike gold with her superior sprint power off the final bend.
But Davies, who had been a sensational winner of the 10,000m on the opening day of the athletics program, showed extraordinary resolve to kick again and prevail over the final few metres.
The third Australian home was Linden Hall, who finished seventh.
Also on the track, Lachie Kennedy and Torrie Lewis are dreaming of multiple individual Commonwealth Games medals in Glasgow after the red-hot sprinters surged into their respective 200m finals.
Kennedy ran 20.12 seconds in the outside lane, finishing third in his heat and missing an automatic qualifying spot.
But the 22-year-old was also one of the two fastest losers - and third-fastest across all heats - which was enough to progress to the final.
Before the Games, Kennedy declared the 100m was his biggest priority, freely admitting he was "not as invested" in his other sprint events.
But the man who has won Australia's first Commonwealth men's sprint medal since 1962 is now eyeing more hardware, with a 200m final and 4x100m relay ahead on the program.
"It all depends on the conditions, but I definitely think I can win. That's for sure,"
"I don't know about times. Like, time is so dependent on conditions, but I think I've got what it takes to win.
"But there's some good guys up there, man. So I'm going to have to be at my best."
Lewis qualified automatically for the women's final in a dead heat with Jamaica's Alana Reid, running 20.64 (+4.7m/s) in windy conditions.
The pair were involved in a three-way photo finish with England's Success Eduan, who qualified as one of the two fastest losers.
Cyclists claim three gold for Australia
Leigh Hoffman has bid former teammate Matt Richardson good riddance after Australia's gold medal in the team sprint on day one of the Commonwealth Games track cycling program.
Teammate Ryan Elliott also joked they had cleared Hoffman as their leader, checking his passport to make sure he will stay in the Australian program.
While expressing sympathy for Richardson after a recent nasty race crash in Japan, his former teammates finally spoke freely about the shock defection.
Their big win over England was one of Australia's three cycling gold medals at the Sir Chris Hoy Velodrome on Friday morning, along with the women's team pursuit and para-cyclist Tara Neyland.
Soon after the Paris Olympics, Richardson stunned the sport by switching allegiances to Great Britain.
The ex-Australian was to be one of the biggest stories of the Glasgow Games, taking on former teammates in the match sprint. But there was more drama on the eve of the track program when Richardson pulled out because of injuries from the Japan crash, when a rival cyclist sideswiped him.
Hoffman was sympathetic, to an extent. After largely keeping their counsel over the past two years, the Australians made their feelings about the defection clear.
"It was horrible. I've seen video of the crash. It's pretty serious. I would have loved for him to come here and race and see how [teammate] Danny [Barber] and I stack up," Hoffman said.
"It would have been great if he stayed in Australia, but his heart was obviously never always in it, so good riddance."
Elliott was also asked about Hoffman stepping up since Paris as the leader of the sprint squad.
"We checked his passport for his lineage, so he's good," Elliott joked, in reference to Richardson's dual citizenship.
Australia won three of the seven gold medals on offer during day one at the velodrome.
The Australian women successfully defended their team pursuit Games title, overhauling New Zealand and breaking their own Commonwealth Games record.
Sophie Edwards came out of the pursuit quartet who qualified fastest, with three-time Games gold medallist Georgia Baker taking her place.
Felicity Wilson-Haffenden, Claudia Marcks and Alyssa Polites joined Baker in comfortably beating New Zealand for the gold medal.
Australia rode 4:10.658, while New Zealand clocked 4:12.775.
"Bloody awesome. I couldn't ask for much more. We came in here wanting to win gold, but it's easier said than done," said women's coach Ash Ankudinoff, a former team pursuit world champion.
"It's an exciting bunch. I never cracked an Olympic medal, but we have a good bunch.
"It's just a step in the right direction. Look out, LA."
Kane Perris and his pilot Luke Zaccaria won bronze in the men's tandem B 1km time trial, while Scotland delighted the crowd by winning the first gold of the track program in the event ahead of Wales.
Para-sport veteran Jess Gallagher, with Jacqui Mengler-Mohr piloting, took silver behind New Zealand in the women's tandem B sprint.
Molly McGill, Kristina Clonan and Alessia McCaig were fourth-fastest qualifiers in the women's team sprint and lost their bronze ride-off to Scotland, as Wales beat England for gold.
Catch up on the full day of events in our blog below.
AAP
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Recap
Here are the gold medals Australia has won so far today:
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 8:39am
We'll leave it there for today
A big thanks for being here with us again folks!
Another fantastic day of Australian sport at these Commonwealth Games, capped today by that epic women's 5,000m.
We'll be back this evening to bring you another day of coverage.
Can't wait to see you then!
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 8:21am
'Pure grit' - Rose Davies on her stunning 5,000m win
Here's what Davies had to say to 7 Sport after that epic effort in the women's 5,000m:
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 8:11am
Sport in shadow
As the sun moved low in the evening at the Scotstoun Stadium, the very talented photographers had a field day capturing some of the world's best athletes in a very different light.
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 8:00am
Where are Rose and Jess with their medals?
You might have become used to us showing you our wonderful winners and their medals shortly after their events.
So where are our newest medallists, Rose Davies and Jess Hull?
Their medal ceremony is tomorrow! You'll have to be up very early at 3:44am AEST to catch it.
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 7:47am
Athletics: Peter Bol is all of us
Right after he qualified for the men's 800m final, Peter Bol sat down to see if his fellow Aussies would join him.
ABC photographer Che Chorley captured Bol on the edge of his seat as the race finished.
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 7:28am
A medal tally update
It's been another strong day for Australia when it comes to the medal tally.
We've officially ticked over 50 gold medals for these Games!
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 7:15am
Aussie tandem B sprint silver medallists reveal cause of crash
Jacqui Mengler-Mohr and Jessica Gallagher hit the deck hard in the second race of their women's Tandem B Sprint final, bringing the New Zealanders down with them. They lost the last two races to claim silver.
"We tried to adjust and handle, but the tyre had failed. ... It's not how many times you fall, it's how many times you get back up," pilot Mengler-Mohr said.
Their bike's tyres are inflated to about 200psi and Mengler-Mohr said they went from riding on roller skates to ice skates in the blink of an eye.
Gallagher says there were some scrapes and bruises but otherwise everyone is OK. And the 2022 Birmingham gold medallist and two-time alpine skiing Paralympic medallist says it was nothing compared to some of her skiing crashes.
"Controversially, probably skiing [crashes are worse]. The speeds are a lot higher and the pitches are a lot steeper, but maybe don't tell everyone around here."
Fortunately, they crashed before they hit top speed, but Mengler-Mohr pointed out lower-speed crashes can have worse injuries as the riders fall straight down into the ground, rather than with a little bit of horizontal cushioning, for lack of a better word.
"So, right back at you on the ski crashes. We were at greater risk by being slower so it is still quite a miracle that we are unscathed," she said.
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 6:58am
Athletics: Jenneke fifth in hurdles decider
Australia's Michelle Jenneke was fifth in the 100m hurdles final, running a time of 12.84.
In a major upset, Nigeria's ex-world champion Tobi Amusan was relegated to bronze.
Devynne Charlton of Bahamas won gold ahead of Jamaican Megan Simmonds.
🥇Devynne Charlton (BAH) 12.33
🥈Megan Simmonds (JAM) 12.41
🥉Tobi Amusan (NGR) 12.60
Key Event
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 6:34am
🥇🥈DAVIES, HULL WIN GOLD AND SILVER!
Rose Davies wins gold and Jess Hull the silver!
WHAT A RACE!
Davies claims the women's 5,000m gold to add to her victory in the 10,000m.
The Aussie is the first to achieve the feat at a Commonwealth Games.
She and Hull were neck and neck in the final 200 metres.
Davies had enough of a kick in the home straight to clinch gold in a time of 14:44.53, with Hull clocking 14:45.01.
What an achievement for Davies!
She crossed the line with a massive smile on her face!
Australia's third finalist, Linden Hall, was seventh in 14:55.28.
For the record, Scotland's Megan Keith took the bronze with a time of 14:49.10.
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 6:33am
Athletics: Hull and Davies in mix for medals
One lap to go - Jess Hull and Rose Davies are in medal contention!
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 6:32am
Athletics: Hull and Davies in lead pack
Jess Hull and Rose Davies are in the lead pack of five with two laps remaining in the women's 5,000m final.
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 6:27am
Athletics: Aussies in touch with leaders in 5km final
Australian trio Jess Hull, Linden Hall and Rose Davies are within striking distance midway through the women's 5,000m final.
The field is yet to break apart, but that will change in the latter stages of the race.
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 6:25am
Athletics: Jamaican's desperate lunge to make final
Navasky Anderson did all he could to make the men's 800m final.
The Jamaican's desperation was illustrated when he fell over the finish line in the second semi as he lunged to place inside the top three.
Anderson ended up finishing fourth, which was outside the three automatic qualifying berths for the final.
But his efforts were rewarded when he clinched the final non-automatic qualifying spot by just 0.13 of a second.
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 6:13am
Athletics: Davies back on track for 5,000m final
Rose Davies has been on a high since winning the women's 10,000m gold earlier in the athletics program.
She returns to the track to to contest the 5,000m final, which gets underway at 6:18am AEST.
Davies joins fellow Australians Jess Hull and Linden Hall on the start line.
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 6:03am
Hull ready to race FAST
This is what we like to see.
It also doesn't feel real seeing her glide around the track so effortlessly.
Hull will compete in this morning's AEST 5,000m final and Saturday's mile decider!
Key Event
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 5:55am
Athletics: Three Aussies through to 800m final!
Luke Boyes and Peyton Craig have joined Peter Bol in advancing to the men's 800m final!
Boyes was second in the last semi, running a time of 1:45.11.
Craig was one spot back with 1:45.25, clinching the final automatic qualifying berth from the second semi.
Kenya's Kelvin Loti triumphed in 1:45.09.
Three Aussies in the final, how good!
Key Event
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 5:47am
Athletics: Bol reaches 800m final!
Well done Peter Bol!
The Aussie is through to the men's 800m final after finishing second in his semi via a time of 1:45.25.
Bol was at the back of the pack when the bell sounded after the first lap.
Amid some traffic, he was sixth with 200m to go, but brilliantly launched his kick in the home straight to finish second to Kenya's Wyclife Kinyamal (1:44.91).
Bol was the silver medallist four years ago in Birmingham.
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 5:44am
Athletics: Torrie's got more in the tank
She was first by the slimmest of margins in her semi-final, but she's told 7 Sport after her race that she relaxed a little more than she intended in that race.
Promising signs ahead of the final tomorrow!
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 5:37am
Athletics: Owusu fourth in triple jump decider
Australia's Desleigh Owusu has just missed the medals in the women's triple jump.
Owusu finished one spot off the podium in fourth place.
Her best leap came in the second round when she posted a season's best of 13.81m.
Dominican Thea Lafond claimed the gold with 14.60m, while Jamaicans Ackelia Smith (14.04m) and Shantae Foreman (13.96m) collected the silver and bronze medals respectively.
Fri 31 Jul 2026 at 5:31am
Athletics: Bol to lead Aussie 800m charge
Peter Bol will join Australian teammates Luke Boyes and Peyton Craig in the men's 800m semifinals from 5:45am AEST.
Bol is drawn in the opening semi, with Boyes and Craig to follow in the second.
Four years ago in Birmingham, Bol won silver in the 800m.
The first three in each semi automatically qualify for the final, with the next two fastest also earning berths.