Two people were briefly taken into custody at a junior AFL grand final in Canberra last night after reports of flares being set off and items thrown at players.
Officers were called to Phillip Oval around 8:30pm after receiving reports of a disturbance during the Under 18s AFL Canberra Grand Final between Marist College and the Belconnen Magpies.
"Reports received by police were that from a group of between 50 and 75 teens, items had been thrown at players, flares had been discharged, and multiple patrons were intoxicated," ACT Policing said in a statement.
"Two people were briefly taken into custody and released at the venue."
'Chaotic scenes' at conclusion of the match
In a message to parents of Marist AFL players, the college's deputy principal Liam Stakelum said the end of the game was "chaotic", with spectators taken into custody for "anti-social behaviour".
"They were part of a group that exhibited considerably poor behaviour throughout the match," Mr Stakelum said.
"After [quarter] time, we made the decision to keep our students down one end to ensure they were safe and away from the potential risk.
"I will state that it does not look like these [spectators] were affiliated with Belconnen."
ACT Policing said after the match concluded, event management staff advised all spectators to clear the venue.
"All patrons left the scene without further incident," the ACT Policing statement said.
Mr Stakelum said in his message to parents that officers believed the group posed a risk to students, and wanted to limit their engagement with the group as much as possible.
"I know the chaotic scenes at the conclusion of the match are hard to reconcile, but I do want everyone to know that the police were the ones who were in control," he said.
"The decision to remove everyone from the ground again was [made by] the police.
"This was done because they couldn't differentiate between the true Belconnen supporters, and the spectators who were causing the trouble.
"We may not agree with the decision, but coming from a safety perspective, I can understand the intent. Scenarios like this are not easy to manage."
An AFL spokesperson said the safety of players, officials and spectators was "of paramount importance" to the AFL.
"[Safety] guided all decision-making during last night's U18s boys' grand final,"
"The AFL worked closely with ACT Policing throughout the event and took appropriate steps to contain the situation and ensure the safe conduct of the match."
The Belconnen Magpies Football Club has been contacted for comment.