In short:
A group of current and former Aboriginal police officers are suing the Northern Territory government over allegations they were subject to racial discrimination and vilification while serving on the force.
The class action follows a decision by the Australian Human Rights Commission to terminate a complaint made by the officers two years ago.
What's next?
The case is due to go before the Federal Court later this month, with lawyers pushing for a trial in 2027.
A group of current and former Aboriginal police officers in the Northern Territory are suing the Territory government in the Federal Court, claiming they experienced decades of racial discrimination, abuse and vilification while working for NT Police.
The group members claim they were subject to offensive and derogatory language and received less pay than their non-Indigenous colleagues for similar work.
The class action follows an unsuccessful complaint made by the Aboriginal community police officers (ACPOs) to the Australian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) in September 2024.
Earlier this year, the AHRC terminated that claim after the parties failed to reach a resolution, giving the officers 60 days to take legal action.
One of the three lead applicants, Shawn Lewfatt, who has been a serving member of the NT Police Force (NTPF) in Darwin for almost 30 years, said the lawsuit was a last resort.
"It's been a long journey," Mr Lewfatt said.
"We tried to fight it internally for decades, but we had no voice.
"I felt it was our only option."
Mr Lewfatt, who first joined the police force in 1998, said he pursued a career in policing to have a positive impact on his community, but claimed he struggled with the culture within the force.
"I've experienced many incidents of direct and indirect racial discrimination and I know my fellow Indigenous employees have also experienced it," he said.
Officers seeking compensation, apology
The applicants are being represented by Melbourne-based law firm Gordon Legal.
Partner at the firm, Seb O'Meara, described the allegations made by the three officers as "deeply concerning".
"They concern almost three decades of unchecked racist abuse and unequal terms and conditions of employment,"
"[Our clients] allege systemic racial vilification and abuse, both directed at them personally, but also directed to others - including community members - by members of the NT Police Force, in their presence."
Mr O'Meara said the officers were seeking compensation for the "loss and damage" suffered, as well as an apology from NT Police.
"They think that change is really important, and that is what is motivating them," the lawyer said.
Mr O'Meara estimated the class action could grow to include hundreds of current and former ACPOs.
Claimant wants 'safer, fair work environment'
NT Police has been subject to intense scrutiny over recent years since damaging allegations of racist behaviour within the force were aired during the coronial inquest into the 2019 shooting death of Kumanjayi Walker.
The NT coroner, Elisabeth Armitage, found "clear evidence of entrenched, systemic and structural racism within the NT Police" and that examples of racism were ignored by the then-commissioner, Michael Murphy.
In the wake of the inquest findings, NT Police released an anti-racism strategy which included a commitment to provide anti-racism training for all employees.
Mr Lewfatt said he wanted a "safer, fair work environment for Aboriginal employees" but that he was also seeking accountability.
"It's all well and good that the department are moving forward," he said.
"But I think it's also important they acknowledge the past, the hurt, the trauma that many Indigenous employees have had to endure."
In response to news of the class action, an NT Police spokesperson said the force was "aware of the ongoing legal proceedings" and it would be "inappropriate for the NTPF to comment further".
The case is set to go before a court for the first time later this month, with the applicants' lawyers seeking to have the matter progress to a trial in 2027.