In short:
Former Moonee Valley councillor Cam Nation has been jailed for three months over a 2019 sexual assault.
Nation pleaded guilty to assaulting a 17-year-old boy and will be forced to attend drug, mental health and sex offenders' programs in addition to his jail term.
What's next?
Defence lawyers for Nation say they will appeal the sentence and lodge an application for bail next week.
A former Melbourne mayor has spent his first night in custody as part of a three-month jail sentence for sexually assaulting a teenage boy.
Warning: This story contains details that may be distressing for some readers
A suppression order was lifted on Thursday afternoon, allowing media to name Cameron Nation as the ex-Moonee Valley councillor at the centre of the case.
Nation served for 11 years as a councillor, before quitting in 2024 after an IBAC investigation found he traded cocaine for influence in planning matters.
He pleaded guilty in the Melbourne Magistrates' Court to sexually assaulting a 17-year-old boy who was under his supervision in 2019.
In jailing Nation, Magistrate Michelle Mykytowycz said his crimes were too serious for a non-custodial sentence, even though prosecutors had said it was an option open to her.
Nation assaulted 'vulnerable' teen after supplying drugs, court hears
The court heard Nation had invited the teenager, who was drunk, over to his home in December 2019.
The boy arrived around 3:30am and Nation supplied him with "nangs", also known as nitrous oxide.
Nation then pulled down the boy's pants and performed a sex act on the "vulnerable" and "spaced-out" teen, the magistrate said.
"The complainant said he felt helpless and overwhelmed,"
"He was not enjoying what was happening and he didn't know what to do as he had no control."
Along with jail time, Magistrate Mykytowycz also sentenced Nation to complete an 18-month community corrections order, forcing him to attend drug, mental health and sex offenders' programs.
Nation's lawyer Sam Norton said he would appeal the sentence and would lodge an application for bail next week.
Nation was charged by police in October 2025. Days later, he tried to kill himself and was hospitalised, the court heard.
A magistrate then put a suppression order in place to protect his mental health, banning reporting of Nation's name in connections with his case.
Lawyer's bid to keep Nation's identity secret fails
On Thursday, Nation's defence lawyer failed in a bid to extend the suppression order for two years, after arguing media stories posed an unacceptable mental health risk to his client.
Magistrate Mykytowycz said while Nation's mental health was in a "parlous" state, he was currently well supported by family and had been accessing professional help in the community.
Nation wept in court as the magistrate outlined how his mental health declined after the IBAC investigation, which did not result in him being charged.
"It is often the case the fall from grace for those in the public arena is accompanied by increased media attention,"
Nation departed the courtroom with three security guards by his side. His jacket was confiscated and he was provided with a plain white T-shirt to wear.
In 2024, Nation stunned fellow Mooney Valley councillors, when he attended a meeting via video link and abruptly resigned, telling them "Ciao".
Three years earlier, he avoided a criminal conviction after pleading guilty to falsifying claims for two community swim grants.
Earlier on Thursday, Premier Ben Carroll was asked whether the ex-mayor's bid to keep his name suppressed met community standards.
"Simple answer: no," he said.
Opposition Leader Jess Wilson agreed.
"We've had serious concerns about suppression orders for some time," she said.
Both the major parties have pledged to update the state's Open Courts Act, after cases of people charged with serious sex crimes applying to keep their names suppressed.