In short:
Respected Liberal politician Bruce Baird has died at the age of 84.
He is being remembered as a "true parliamentarian" with a "wonderful heart" whose contributions to NSW and Australia were "extraordinary".
Daughter Julia Baird says the family is in shock at his sudden passing.
Former Liberal politician Bruce Baird has died aged 84.
Mr Baird was father to former New South Wales premier Mike Baird, journalist Julia Baird and son Steve.
In a post on social media, Ms Baird said he died suddenly on Friday morning, and the family was still in shock.
"It feels like an eclipse, when your father dies. Everything suddenly black, then sore eyes and the world cast in another kind of light," she wrote.
She described him as a character, a fit, extroverted man, who was full of life, who loved ocean swimming, had lots of friends and was "fond of a gossip and a yarn".
"He taught the three of his kids to be bold, to step with certainty and to dream big, 'You go for it', he'd say.
"He was married to Judith, his first girlfriend and great love, for more than half a century."
She added that outside of politics, he was a "bon vivant who loved parties - all and any parties - champagne, airport lounges and dodgy jokes".
The NSW Liberal Party paid tribute to Mr Baird in a statement.
"Bruce was a party stalwart and a greatly respected politician, serving the people of NSW in the state and federal parliaments," a spokesperson said.
"We offer our deepest condolences on behalf of all members to his family at this difficult time."
While he was the NSW minister for Transport, Roads and Tourism, Mr Baird played a key role in securing the 2000 Olympic Games in Sydney.
Road to politics
Speaking on a podcast in 2024, when asked what made him enter politics, he attributed it to the Vietnam War and a talk by an American priest.
"In my teenage years I loved to party, and I loved to surf. I went to uni and not much more was happening," he said at the time.
"The Vietnam War made me think about issues, political issues and later, when I was in New York, I had a consul general there when I was Australian trade commissioner who suggested to me that I should think about going into politics.
"Later, I heard a talk by an American Episcopalian priest on 'God has a plan for your life', and it was about committing the talents that we have to him and just see what happens. And it wasn't that long after that that I was pre-selected for a seat in Northcote in NSW politics and things went from there."
Prime Minister Anthony Albanese said Australia had lost "a real gentleman and a true parliamentarian".
"Bruce had the uncommon distinction of serving his nation as a Liberal member at both the state and federal level," he said in a statement.
"In whichever role he served, whether it was in Parliament or leading bodies including the Tourism and Transport Forum and the Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council, he served with distinction, and he served with principle and unwavering humanity.
"Tellingly, the respect and admiration for Bruce knew no political boundaries. Our hearts go out to his adored children Julia, Steve and Mike."
'A mentor and a friend'
After a career in state politics, Mr Baird went on to represent the federal seat of Cook in the Sutherland Shire in NSW from 1998 to 2007.
The seat was later won by former prime minister Scott Morrison.
In a statement, Mr Morrison described Mr Baird as a "giant, a mentor and a friend".
"Bruce had a tremendous sense of humour and a wonderful heart," he said in the statement.
"He was a magnificent witness and role model, who showed the way to serve as a Christian in politics.
"Bruce leaves behind a rich legacy in his family, who he loved and was so proud of, speaking constantly about all of them any chance he could, as well as all those he encouraged and supported, which I was privileged to have been one."
NSW Liberal leader Kellie Sloane said Mr Baird's contribution to NSW and Australia was "extraordinary".
"Throughout his public life, Bruce was driven by a strong sense of service, conviction, and compassion, earning the trust and respect of people regardless of their political affiliation," she said in a statement.
"Ever jovial and encouraging, Bruce was often the life of the party."
Former prime minister John Howard paid tribute to Mr Baird on Saturday, describing him as a personal friend.
Mr Howard, who was a federal parliamentary colleague of Mr Baird's between 1998 and 2007, said the pair were able to put aside differences on "some political issues".
"It is well known that he disagreed with aspects of the policy of the then-Howard Government towards asylum seekers," Mr Howard said in a statement.
"He always argued his position with great integrity and in a manner designed to preserve and not disrupt the unity of the government. "
Mr Howard extended his and wife Janette's deepest sympathies to Mr Baird's family.
"You have much to be proud of," he said.
The ABC's Global Affairs Editor and former press gallery member, Laura Tingle, described Mr Baird as one of the "world's most decent human beings".
"One of the rare politicians who I regarded as a friend, along with his beloved wife Judy," she said.
In referencing his time in federal politics, Tingle added, he was one of a small group of traditional "small L" Liberals to last into the Howard government.
"That meant he represented a tradition of economic conservatism, but socially moderate policies in a party which had become increasingly hardline on social issues from welfare to immigration," she said.
"Along with Petro Georgiou, Russell Broadbent and Judi Moylan, he defied and challenged John Howard's push for the detention of asylum seekers and to send all asylum seekers arriving in Australia by boat offshore for processing."
In 2008, he was appointed as the chair of the Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council by the Rudd Labor government.
Former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull said Mr Baird was "a genuine liberal, motivated by love, not hate".
"He was never dull and had a mischievous sense of humour," he said.
"He was a courageous politician who, in federal parliament, often in league with Petro Georgiou, put his own compassionate principles ahead of personal advancement."
Mr Baird retired from politics before the 2007 general election, when he expressed his disappointment that he was never made a minister in the Howard Liberal government.
"I have no regrets, and in politics you have to learn to roll with the punches," he said at the time.
Mr Baird was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia in 2010.