live
Commonwealth Games live updates: Diamonds face their toughest match yet, swimming program wraps up
It's day six of the Commonwealth Games which means the Diamonds have perhaps their toughest match-up of the group stage against South Africa.
Over in the pool, the swimming wraps up with Lakeisha Patterson trying to equal her haul of three Paralympic gold medals with a third Commonwealth title in the women's 100m S9 freestyle.
Follow all the action in our live blog.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Wed 29 Jul 2026 at 6:45pm
About last night
There's a case to say that Australian athletics has never had it as good as it does now.
Last night, amidst the teeming rain of Glasgow, Lachie Kennedy and Torrie Lewis delivered spellbinding performances that simply sizzled.
Here's Jon Healy's view of the night from a sodden Scotstoun.
Wed 29 Jul 2026 at 6:37pm
Premature fist bumping left Peyton Craig 'pissed off for days'
Don't expect any early fist-bumps from Australia's Peyton Craig at the Commonwealth Games.
The 21-year-old middle-distance gun has learnt his lesson.
But he did it the hard way, after a premature celebration with Bob Abdelrahimat the national championships in April cost him a spot in the 800m semifinals.
As the pair went to make contact, a diving Degras Amekata pinched the second qualifying spot from Craig by four-hundreths of a second.
"At the time I was heated. I was pissed off for probably two days afterwards," Paris Olympian Craig recalled.
"Especially sitting from the sideline watching the national final knowing I could be competitive in it, but it's a lesson.
"I'm still only 21, I've got a lot of lessons to learn. I'll never do it again, that's for sure, and thankfully it didn't have too many repercussions on the rest of the season.
"Fist-bumps are put away for now. They're banned."
Craig opened his Commonwealth Games campaign in vastly different fashion with a much stronger finish at Scotstoun Stadium, surging home late to secure third in his 800m heat.
Craig admitted he was caught slightly off-guard when England's Max Burgin set a hot pace.
The Australian got stuck mid-pack but gritted his teeth and fought his way through, later describing the run as a "rust-buster".
"My coach Craig [Mottram] is very big on - while obviously we get out with intent - having the ability to relax and get yourself out of any situation," Craig said.
"I feel like that really helped me. I wasn't in a great spot through the bell and still not in a great spot with 200 to go.
"But it's just backing myself and backing the kick. I've always had a strong finish and I knew I just had enough to get it done, and thankfully I did."
AAP
Wed 29 Jul 2026 at 6:30pm
Weightlifting: Bella Andueza is up first
No time to waste this evening, as the women's 77kg weightlifting gets underway at the Armadillo.
Australia has Bella Andueza in this one, semifinalist at the CrossFit games, this is her Commonwealth Games debut.
Wed 29 Jul 2026 at 6:25pm
Hello everyone
Good day or good night to everyone reading and welcome to the ABC Sport coverage of the 2026 Commonwealth Games.
My name is Simon Smale and I, alongside James Tugwell, will be taking you through the first part of today's action from here in Australia, while Jon Healy will once more be out and about in the wilds of Glasgow.
As I made my way to the office today, a gorgeous golden moon was rising (thanks to the planned burns in Brisbane), and I figured it was a wonderful premonition about what to expect over the course of the next few hours as this typically successful golden Games continues for Australia.
In the first part of the day we have action in the pool, on the track, on the rink, on the platform and on the court.
Lots to get through, so get aboard the hype bus and join us - destination, the podium, probably.