In short:
The NSW premier's first day of his trade mission to India included a visit to the Asha community centre and the official launch of Western Sydney University's India campus.
At the centre, he met young people who had grown up in poverty in Delhi, describing his visit as a "humbling" experience.
He said the Indian community was "hugely important" for the future of NSW.
The premier says the New South Wales Indian community should feel proud of its contribution to the state, despite continued debate about Australia's immigration numbers.
On the first day of his official visit to India, Chris Minns met young people who had grown up in poverty in Delhi only to be accepted into Australian universities.
They included 22-year-old Madhu.
"I'm from a south Delhi slum. My home is a one-room home," she said.
"We don't have a proper kitchen and toilet [so] we have to go to the public toilet."
Madhu said nobody from her family had left India before.
However, next year she will begin a master's degree in public health at the University of Sydney, thanks to support from the Asha society, which offers health and education opportunities to some of Delhi's poorest children.
"It will change my whole future and my whole family's future as well,"
"I will help my community to grow ... and do something good in their life."
The premier said his visit to the Asha community centre was a "humbling" experience.
"[It's] one I don't think I'll ever forget," he said.
"There is a real strength of character and dignity within those communities, even though they're doing it incredibly tough."
Mr Minns, who joined some of the children for a game of street cricket, said he hoped the recent debate about student visas would not affect Australia's reputation as a welcoming destination.
"We need to make sure that education, which is the second-biggest export industry in New South Wales ... is open, warm and acknowledges the economic benefits for our community," he said.
Earlier this year, One Nation leader Pauline Hanson called for an Australian "monoculture", saying multiculturalism had failed.
While the premier said he would not use the trip to rebuke One Nation, he would seek to highlight the benefits Indian migrants brought to their communities.
"I want to make Indian-Australians proud of the relationship," he said.
"The New South Wales government and its leadership has got their back.
"We believe they're hugely important for our future and we think that they're proud Aussies who love our country."
A piece of Western Sydney in India
The premier, and Treasurer Daniel Mookhey, also officially launched a new India campus for Western Sydney University.
The facility is still being built in Uttar Pradesh, but will start taking students in February next year, with a focus on agricultural technology, sustainability and business administration.
The Vice-Chancellor George Williams said the university was committed to "admitting students from all backgrounds, on merit".
"We want this campus to be accessible to the best and brightest in India," he said.
However, the university's ability to accept foreign students at its Australian campuses could be affected by looming changes to Australia's immigration system.
The number of student visas increased from 383,910 in 2017 to 528,999 this year, according to the Department of Home Affairs.
One Nation has already vowed to slash student visa numbers and the federal government is now considering tweaking eligibility settings to bring Australia's overall immigration intake down.
Professor Williams warned that reducing foreign student numbers would have negative consequences for the state's economy.
"If you're in aged care, there's a good chance it's a Nepalese student," he said.
"If you're blood's being taken in Western Sydney, there's a good chance it's a Filipino international student who studied at Western Sydney University."
The construction industry was also heavily reliant on foreign students, he said.
"We depend on international students for our prosperity and I'd love to have a debate that actually started with recognising their contributions," he said.