In short:
Documents lodged in US courts have revealed UEFA is planning legal action against FIFA boss Gianni Infantino.
Infantino has been under enormous pressure since a now-scrapped plan to sell stakes in the World Cup was announced last month.
UEFA member nations have also issued a fiery joint press release demanding an independent probe into the formation of the scheme.
European football's governing body, UEFA, is preparing a criminal complaint against FIFA's embattled president, Gianni Infantino, over his failed plan to sell commercial stakes in the World Cup to private investors.
In an explosive escalation between football's two most powerful entities, UEFA has applied to federal courts in New York and Florida, demanding the release of information over the widely derided "FIFA Forward Enterprise" proposal to be used in legal proceedings in Switzerland, where FIFA is based.
The application document, seen by the ABC, reveals UEFA intends to "bring criminal claims in Switzerland against Infantino and possibly other FIFA officials and advisers for criminal mismanagement under Article 158 of the Swiss Criminal Code".
The court filings also claim that Infantino and a "small group of advisers" spent over a year secretly preparing the controversial privatisation scheme.
"The secretive structuring, valuation, financing, and marketing inflicted direct and concrete injury on FIFA reputation, governance authority, and commercial relationships to the detriment of FIFA as well as its 211 members, including UEFA's 55 member associations," the document claims.
UEFA's lawyers further allege that the stakes in the World Cup offered to private backers were "absurdly low" and not independently evaluated.
"Under the terms Infantino announced, those investors stood to acquire a permanent financial interest in FIFA's commercial arm for $US4.2 billion ($5.84 billion), implying an absurdly low enterprise value of only approximately $US20 billion, a figure that was neither the product of an open, competitive auction, nor tested by any independent valuer," the document says.
"Infantino pushed the plan through internal FIFA approval only days earlier at a hastily convened meeting where a limited number of FIFA management officials and employees--some of whom had never heard of the plan--were given mere hours to sign off on an unprecedented multi-billion dollar scheme.
"In truth, it was a vehicle for Infantino and that small circle to acquire a permanent stake in and otherwise profit from FIFA most valuable assets to the detriment of FIFA, its members, and other parties within the football family."
The FIFA Forward proposal was announced by Infantino on July 28, naming Thrive Eternal, an investment vehicle affiliated with Thrive Capital, as the lead private backer.
Thrive Capital is run by billionaire Joshua Kushner, the brother of Donald Trump's son-in-law Jared Kushner. Mr Trump has repeatedly claimed that he and Infantino are "good friends".
The move sparked immediate infighting within global football. UEFA declared its member nations, which includes England, France, Spain, and Germany, would boycott the next World Cup if the privatisation project was not scrapped.
Infantino eventually backflipped on the proposal, conceding that it "created divisions" and was no longer viable.
On Thursday, UEFA member nations issued a fiery joint press release demanding an independent probe into the formation of the scheme.
"FIFA cannot investigate itself and expect the football community simply to accept its conclusions," the statement read.
"The consequences of this crisis go beyond governance. The trust required to exercise the office of FIFAPresident has been broken and cannot be restored by withdrawing one proposal, issuing assurances or promising reform after the event. World football now needs new leadership capable of rebuilding that trust."
FIFA has been contacted for comment.