In short:
South African police have launched a manhunt after gunmen killed at least 27 people in two mass shootings in Cape Town and Johannesburg.
The attacks unfolded in places people were gathering, at a tavern and an entertainment centre.
What's next?
Police are yet to make any arrests for either incident.
South African police have launched a manhunt after gunmen killed at least 27 people in two mass shootings in Cape Town and Johannesburg.
The first incident occurred about 9:30pm local time on Saturday when eight gunmen armed with assault rifles stormed a bar west of Johannesburg, killing 17 people and wounding 15 others.
Police said the suspects opened fire on customers drinking outside before moving inside where they continued to shoot.
The victims included 13 males and four females, police said.
In a statement posted by South African police on social media, the shooters "allegedly searched some patrons and took their cellphones before fleeing the scene in two unidentified motor vehicles".
South Africa's President Cyril Ramaphosa said Police has photos of the suspects, and were working to track the down.
"This cannot go on like this" Mr Ramaphosa said.
Illegal mining motive
Authorities were still working to establish the motives for the shootings near Johannesburg and Cape Town, but initial investigations suggested one could be a turf war between illegal miners and a rival business.
Residents said illegal miners, known locally as zama zamas from an isiZulu expression for "taking a chance", live in the area where powerful gangs control the illicit gold mining trade.
The province's police commissioner Tommy Mthombeni told reporters that one line of inquiry was that the shooting was a "turf war in terms of illegal mining".
Saturday's shooting could be retaliation for another at the same tavern about a month ago, he added.
They said the suspects also torched two vehicles after fleeing.
Business rivalry
Early on Sunday during a separate shooting at dining venue just outside Cape Town, gunmen killed 10 people and wounded 11 more.
Police said the shooters entered the venue near the town of Lwandle at 1:46am local time, and "shot at patrons".
Five of the victims were declared dead at the scene while the others succumbed to their injuries while being taken to hospital.
"Suspects were reportedly armed with AK-47 rifles and pistols," South African police said in a statement posted on social media on Sunday.
No suspect has been arrested in either case, police said, and detectives are working to find the gunmen.
An eyewitness video from the venue shows people dancing and singing in a crowded outdoor area when a burst of shots rings out and screams are heard.
A police official said "a business jealousy might have been the issue," following reports people had been buying alcohol in cheaper shops and going to the venue to drink.
A third attack on Tuesday night killed 11 people including a pregnant woman, after multiple gunmen opened fire at a house party in KwaMakhutha township south of Durban.
Police have not reported any arrests.
Ongoing violence
The attacks come as the country grapples with illegal firearms, gun violence and gang rivalries.
The country of about 62 million people records roughly 60 murders a day, among the highest rates globally.
In March, soldiers moved into violence hotspots in Johannesburg to support police efforts to tackle rampant crime.
President Cyril Ramaphosa described ongoing violence and crime as one of the biggest threats facing the country.
Despite ongoing military intervention to keep crime at bay, gun violence still remains a persistent problem.
In Johannesburg, 10 women have been killed in a single municipality in two months, the latest was found on Saturday partially unclothed and stoned to death.
A suspect has been taken into custody, police said.
The nine other victims were mostly in their 20s and 30s, with some found stripped of their clothes and showing signs of sexual assault.
Police have offered a 400,000 rand ($25,000) reward for information leading to the arrest of the killer or killers, while the Democratic Alliance, South Africa's second-largest political party, has put up a further $31,000.
Wires/ABC