Carlton defeats Melbourne to continue dream run with AFL wildcard round win
Carlton will play an elimination final against Geelong after winning a wildcard clash against Melbourne at the MCG.
Despite conceding the first four goals of the game, the Blues improved steadily throughout the game to grind the Demons down, before finally emerging 19-point winners.
Ben Ainsworth kicked three goals for Carlton, while Sam Walsh and rising star Jagga Smith were sensational in the midfield.
The Blues had multiple opportunities to put the game to bed in the last quarter, but it wasn't until Smith converted a set shot for his second of the evening when the result was put to bed.
Look back at how the action unfolded in the live blog below.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
AFL Wildcard Scoreboard
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
That's where we'll leave it
So that wraps up a heck of a weekend of footy for wildcard round.
The storylines are running wild and free, with Carlton going another week and a real test against Geelong at the MCG.
No Pies, and Scott Pendlebury going to the Suns - we haven't been short of surprises the last 48 hours!
We also say goodbye to a couple of players tonight, with the retirements of Jake Melksham and Tom McDonald for the Demons. Congratulations to both men on their careers.
We will be back on the blog on Thursday night for a mouthwatering qualifying final between Fremantle and Hawthorn at Perth Stadium (already a sell-out!).
But for now, this is Andrew McGarry saying thank you for joining us on tonight's blog and wishing you all a very good night!
Key Event
'It's the beginning of a journey for us': Demons coach Steven King reflects after season's end
Melbourne coach Steven King has been reflecting after the end of his first season as coach.
Speaking to the media he acknowledged that Carlton had played very well and that his team had not been able to take their chances.
He said he had spoken to a big room of players and staff after the game.
"It was a case of getting the balance right between the disappointment that goes with losing a final.
"It's the beginning of a journey that we're going on - we're not being defined by tonight.
"I couldn't be more proud of them for what they've done, their body of work.
"If you'd said at the start of the year that we'd go from seven wins to 15, I would have taken that any day of the week."
Asked about Kozzy Pickett, who had six shots at goal and scored 0.3, he replied:
"That probably sums up our night - we weren't able to pull through, it wasn't just (Pickett), we just didn't take our chances."
Key Event
Finals schedule confirmed
- Qualifying final: Thursday September 3, 8:10pm (AEST) - Fremantle vs Hawthorn (Perth Stadium)
- Elimination final: Friday September 4, 7:40pm (AEST) - Geelong vs Carlton (MCG)
- Qualifying final: Saturday September 5, 3:15pm (AEST) - Sydney vs Brisbane (SCG)
- Elimination final: Saturday September 5, 7:35pm (AEST) - Adelaide Crows vs Western Bulldogs (Adelaide Oval)
Match report: Blues stun Demons in wildcard to set up Cats final
Carlton have beaten Melbourne by 19 points in their AFL wildcard match to extend their fairytale resurgence into an elimination final clash with Geelong.
Under Josh Fraser, the Blues have famously fought back from a 1-8 start to the season that cost Michael Voss his job, to first make the wildcard round in 10th place, then reach the elimination final.
After fighting back from an early 21-point deficit, the Blues outgunned Melbourne, who finished seventh in the regular season, to claim a 10.14 (74) to 7.13 (55) victory in front of 91,733 fans at the MCG.
The Blues next face the sixth-placed Cats - who they beat by four points early in Fraser's initial caretaker coach tenure - at the MCG next Friday.
Adelaide will host the Western Bulldogs in Saturday's elimination final.
Newly-crowned Rising Star Jagga Smith (29 disposals, nine clearances) kicked two last-quarter goals and stood tall alongside Sam Walsh (39 disposals, six clearances).
Skipper Patrick Cripps (22 disposals) fought through a left knee issue and close attention from Jack Steele (23 disposals).
Blues recruit Ben Ainsworth (three goals, 21 disposals) was everywhere, and Harry McKay jagged two goals.
Jacob Weitering was huge in defence with help from Harry Dean and Nick Haynes.
Melbourne skipper Max Gawn (27 hitouts, 31 disposals) started well but was reined in by Marc Pittonet.
Star midfielder Kysaiah Pickett had plenty of the ball but his finishing was left wanting, while Jake Bowey (26 disposals), Steele and Harvey Langford (21 disposals) fought hard.
The Demons, without defender Jake Lever (toe) and forwards Jacob van Rooyen (suspension) and Matt Jefferson (knee), were hot early against a nervous Carlton and led by 21 points late in the opening term.
McKay steadied the Blues just before quarter-time, kicking off a run of five straight goals that ended with Brodie Kemp putting Carlton in front for the first time.
Melbourne led by a point at halftime, then had 17 inside-50s to Carlton's nine in the third quarter, but were let down by poor kicking going forward.
Carlton snatched a four-point lead at the final change, then never looked like losing.
Melbourne, who kept butchering chances to fight back and still haven't won a final since their 2021 premiership - losing five at the MCG - farewelled retiring pair Tom McDonald and Jake Melksham.
AAP
It's a vital win - but what does it all mean?
I am a mad Carlton fan and been to everyone of their grand finals from 1972 onwards, I am delighted they won tonight, it means alot, but a little part of me says this isn't right. A little part says this is nothing more than a blatant cash grab by the AFL. Hope the 4 clubs involved in the WC round enjoy the 330k they get to share from the close to 9M in ticket sales the AFL are pocketing
- Darryn
Darryn,
I know for traditionalists this weekend may not sit well, but it's given four teams the chance for a couple of elimination games in front of huge crowds.
The finances may play a huge part in this, but I think it's safe to say after this weekend of football, it's highly unlikely that the wildcard round is going anywhere for the immediate future.
Max Gawn says Demons fell short in the final quarter
As you can expect, it's a disappointed and subdued demons skipper Max Gawn who speaks to Channel Seven after that one.
He says they just didn't get it done in the final quarter, and praises Jacob Weitering and Harry Dean in the Carlton defence for having a really big night.
Not a lot more to say for the captain - it's a tough end to the season.
Patrick Cripps talks after the game
A banged-up Carlton skipper Patrick Cripps speaks to Channel Seven after that epic win.
It's time for Cripps and his team to celebrate a bit - and then go again on Friday night.
Have a listen to the Blues captain here.
What's up next in the AFL finals
So for week one of the finals as we USED to know them, it's:
- Fremantle vs Hawthorn
- Geelong vs Carlton
- Adelaide vs Western Bulldogs
- Sydney vs Brisbane
What have the Blues done?
Since parting ways with Michael Voss, the Blues have lost just two games out of 14 under Josh Fraser.
That win over ladder-leaders Fremantle might have been the Dockers just playing it safe in the final round, but there was nothing safe about tonight.
They played hard, they played hurt and they got it done.
Who knows how far they can go? Although you'd have to say the Cats will be hot favourites next week.
Key Event
FT: Carlton 10.14 (74) beats Melbourne 7.13 (55)
The siren sounds at headquarters, and the Carlton roar is back - and it's deafening!
The fairytale continues, as Blake Acres kicks a point after the siren to make it a 19-point win for the Blues.
They will face Geelong next week.
They conceded the first four goals of the game, but in front of 91,733 souls at the MCG the Blues hit back and deserved the win in the end.
It's the end of a brilliant season for the Demons under Steven King, but they ran out of ideas in the wildcard round.
Jagga Smith kicks the sealer for Carlton!
This is sheer craziness here. The Demons are running out of time, and out of composure. Carlton has a chance to run the clock down, but Brodie Kemp plays on ... the ball bounces around, and finally Jagga Smith grabs it and gets taken high.
It's Jagga Smith from straight in front! he kicks it!
Carlton leads by 18 with under two to go!
Now Cottrell hits the post!
I'm not sure I can do this any more.
The Blues are having the chances, they go inside 50 but Talor Byrnes gets shoved in the back.
his kick goes wide to the square, it falls to Matthew Cottrell, he kicks on the run ... and HE hits the post!
Just over three minutes left, and there is a margin of 13 points to the Blues.
Kemp sprays another one for Carlton!
It's another miss for the Blues!
They get it to Brodie Kemp inside 50 again.
He doesn't hit the post this time - but he doesn't get the goal either!
It's an 11-point lead with under six to go!
Another poster to the Blues!
The Blues had a huge chance there, hitting on the break and then hitting up Brodie Kemp in the pocket.
He lines up ... and hits the post! Another one!
Ten points the lead again.
Carlton winning contested ball, marks as time ticks on
As we say, there's not a lot of difference between these two teams including on the scoreboard.
But Carlton are winning contested ball by 15 now, they have nearly double the marks, and have 15 marks inside 50 to 9 for Melbourne.
The Demons don't have Jacob van Rooyen, and they have to find a way of hitting some targets - and soon.
Rushed behind for Carlton
We have so much time left, but both sides are playing as if there's 30 seconds on the clock.
Sam Walsh just snapped, but a Melbourne defender twisted in mid-air to make the goalkeeper tip of the ball for a rushed behind.
Nearly halfway through the quarter, it's a nine-point game.
Miss from Pickett!
Where are we going here - except for a world of high blood pressure and stress?
The Dees move it forward and Kozzy Pickett has a shot that misses.
His kicking boots have been left at home.
Copper Lord goal turned over because of a throw
The Blues are coming here!
They get it inside 50, and it's fierce stuff. People being hammered. The ball spills and spills and somehow it comes out to Cooper Lord who snaps a goal from 25 out!
But no - it's called back for a throw from Marc Pittonet.
Suddenly it's Melbourne hanging in here with 14 on the clock in the final quarter.
Big chance wasted by Harry McKay
Oh, that was nearly a huge moment for Carlton!
The Blues are sensing a chance here. They get it to half-forward, Sam Walsh shrugs a tackle and hits up Harry McKay who takes a mark one-handed at the top of the square!
The Carlton fans would have taken the roof off if there was a roof! But Harry misses!
It's a 10-point game.