In short:
A man has been banned from Oz Comic-Con events after an alleged biting incident.
An eyewitness said the altercation started when the man was asked if he was selling AI art.
What's next?
Oz Comic-Con says the matter has been referred to police.
A man has been banned from Oz Comic-Con after allegedly biting one of the artists on Sunday afternoon.
Police were called to the Brisbane Convention and Exhibition Centre in South Bank.
Loading...
A police spokesperson told 612 ABC no formal complaint was filed, but they were aware of the incident.
"All parties have been banned from the venue and future events," the spokesperson said.
Footage supplied to the ABC shows Zyllion stall-holder Bowie Chong in a heated argument with another vendor, Victoria Manton-Williams at about 2:40pm.
Manton-Williams told the ABC she asked Chong whether his art was AI-generated, prompting him to tell her to "f*** off".
Manton-Williams alleged Chong snatched the phone away from her artist friend who was filming the scene.
Manton-Williams said her friend pushed Chong, who then allegedly bit her friend's arm and "latched on".
Manton-Williams said she ran over and tried to pull Chong off of her friend and that she was pushed to the ground and kicked in the arm.
Manton-Williams said her friend went to the hospital to receive antibiotics for the bite, which had turned dark red from bruising.
She said the whole encounter was bizarre.
"I've never actually heard of anyone getting bitten at a convention in general," Manton-Williams said.
"I did not even think it was in the realm of possibility that when I went up to ask this guy a question that he would run out and bite someone.
"It's not normal behaviour - not even cosplayers go around biting each other."
Chong has not responded to the ABC's requests for comment. Zyllion's website and social media pages have been deleted.
The incident took place next to the esports gaming booth and the Star Trek fan club booth.
Oz Comic-Con would not say what its policy was on AI-generated art or products at its conventions.
An Oz Comic-Con spokesperson said the matter had been referred to police.
"We are aware of an incident taking place, however it is now a police matter and as such it would be inappropriate to comment further at this time," the spokesperson said.
A Brisbane Convention and Exhibition Centre spokesperson said Oz Comic-Con was run separately from the centre itself.
"We are aware of an incident that occurred and the matter was responded to at the time in accordance with the Centre's established security procedures," the spokesperson said.
"Oz Comic-Con is an independently organised event."