Rockliff adviser Gatenby, ex-minister Courtney chosen as Liberal Senate replacements
Sat 8 Aug 2026 at 2:45pm
, updated
Sat 8 Aug 2026 at 4:36pm
In short:
The replacements for outgoing Liberal senators Wendy Askew and Jonno Duniam have been determined at a meeting in Launceston today.
Chris Gatenby, an adviser to Premier Jeremy Rockliff, will top the Liberals' Senate ticket at the next federal election, with former Gutwein government minister Sarah Courtney coming in second.
Jacki Martin, an adviser to Senator Askew, came third, while Brad Stansfield, a Liberal strategist and pollster, was unsuccessful in his bid to place high.
A senior adviser to Tasmanian Premier Jeremy Rockliff has been chosen to replace outgoing Liberal Senator Wendy Askew, while a former state minister will replace Senator Jonno Duniam when he finishes up at the end of the year.
Former party president Chris Gatenby will top the Liberals Senate ticket at the next federal election, with former minister Sarah Courtney coming in second and Latrobe councillor Jacki Martin third.
Brad Stansfield, a former chief of staff to Will Hodgman, missed out on a spot on the ticket.
Senators Askew and Duniam announced earlier this year they would not be seeking preselection.
Their resignations create casual vacancies, allowing the party to appoint new senators in their place, rather than go through a by-election.
The Senate spots were determined by about 60 Liberal Senate selectors at a meeting in Launceston today.
Long-term staffer gets his chance
Mr Gatenby is a senior adviser to Premier Jeremy Rockliff and has been involved with the Liberals for years, having previously served as party president.
He was raised on a farm in northern Tasmania, and then lived in Launceston.
He has had a broad career including senior roles in policy development, advocacy and government across Australia and the UK.
The father of two ran unsuccessfully in Bass during the last election.
"I think having two attempts at the state level gives you a great grounding at the door step, understanding what people's issues are, and I'm looking forward to getting in there and making a difference," Mr Gatenby said on Saturday.
Premier Rockliff said in July 2025, during the election campaign, Mr Gatenby "brings a wealth of experience to the table, in government, in small business, in policy advocacy and in the Liberal Party, including as our previous party president.
"Chris is the next generation of the party, putting his hand up to represent his community in parliament. He already volunteers in his community, including on the board of the Launceston Harvest Market,"
Sarah Courtney was elected to the Tasmanian parliament in 2014 and appointed to cabinet in 2018.
Ms Courtney, a moderate Liberal, was viewed as a talented minister with leadership potential.
She was Tasmania's first female primary industries minister, but stepped down after starting a relationship with her department secretary, who is now her husband.
She is a trained engineer and owns a boutique vineyard in the Tamar Valley.
Ms Courtney held the health portfolio throughout the COVID pandemic, and listed the guiding of voluntary assisted dying through the parliament as a key achievement.
In 2022, Ms Courtney quit Tasmanian politics after returning from a European holiday during which she caught COVID-19.
Ms Courtney, who was education minister, was forced to isolate in France just days out from school resuming in Tasmania.
When asked on Saturday if she had learnt from that time, Ms Courtney would not comment, instead telling reporters she had a wealth of experience.
"I have enjoyed being a minister, it gave me a thorough understanding of a range of portfolios and that's the experience I bring here today," she said.
"I've got experience as a minister plus I've worked in the real world across a range of industries and that coupled together means I'm good at finding solutions.
"I'm good at working with the community and small business to make sure the policies we have here in Tasmania - and that we're advocating for in Canberra - make a meaningful difference."
Not quite for Martin, Stansfield
Jacki Martin who came third in the vote, has been a Latrobe councillor since 2022 and is currently a parliamentary adviser to Wendy Askew.
She nominated for preselection in June and said on her social media page that she would "bring energy, discipline and relentless determination" to the role.
Representing the north of the state, she has been outspoken recently on the closure of Boags Brewery in Launceston, the Liberty Bell Bay smelter and the sale of Tasmania's largest farm, Rushy Lagoon.
Ms Martin helped campaign for Education Minister Jo Palmer, Senator Claire Chandler and Health Minister Bridget Archer.
"Small business drives me, I'm the child of a small business owner ... my family drives me, your family drives me, and I'll be working every day to see that this generation that's coming up underneath us isn't any worse off than what we have been," Ms Martin said.
Brad Stansfield was unsuccessful in his bid for a place high on the ticket.
Mr Stansfield was chief of staff to former Liberal premier Will Hodgman for eight years, and former Liberal senator Eric Abetz between 2007 and 2010.
He also advised the Tasmanian Liberals through successful state election campaigns from 2014 to 2024.
Mr Stansfield was a partner in a public relations and lobbying firm before leaving to become the owner of a polling firm and co-owner in a stable of regional newspapers.
He also commentated on Tasmanian and federal politics on a podcast which he co-hosted.
Mr Stansfield has also spoken against the federal coalition doing preference deals with One Nation, and in February wrote that the "increased voter support for One Nation is a symptom of the federal coalition's dysfunction for much of last year".