Former MP Peter Katsambanis has been remembered as one of the Liberal Party's "fiercest and finest" warriors following his death, aged 60.
Mr Katsambanis served in the parliaments of Western Australia and Victoria, and was a prominent Greek Australian.
His wife Karalee Katsambanis said his family was "devastated" by his death.
"He was a great man: loved, adored, treasured and respected by so many people," she wrote in a tribute on social media.
"As his wife, I've lost my soulmate and love of my life and I thank everyone for all their support."
She also thanked the heart transplant team at The Alfred hospital who had been caring for him.
Mr Katsambanis served in the WA parliament from 2013 to 2021, first in the Legislative Council and then in the Legislative Assembly as the member for Hillarys.
The seat had been a Liberal heartland before Mr Katsambanis was defeated by Caitlin Collins in Labor's landslide victory in the 2021 state election.
He had held the positions of opposition spokesperson for police, road safety, justice and industrial relations.
He was also a member of the Victorian parliament, from 1996 to 2002.
Liberals mourn loss
The Liberal Party of WA's state director Simon Morgan said Mr Katsambanis would be sorely missed.
"Peter Katsambanis was the fiercest and finest of warriors for the Liberal cause as a student, a trusted adviser and as a member of parliament in both Victoria and Western Australia," Mr Morgan said.
"Our party is poorer for his loss and we extend our heartfelt sympathies to Karalee and to all of Peter's children at this sad time."
WA Opposition Leader Basil Zempilas said Mr Katsambanis made an incredible contribution to the Liberal Party and to public life in two states.
"Service always came first for Peter, he was such a committed representative and he occupies a rare place in Australian politics, having served in the Victorian parliament and in both houses of the parliament of Western Australia," Mr Zempilas said.
"He will be greatly missed by his friends and former colleagues and we extend our very sincere condolences to Karalee and all the family."
Mr Zempilas also acknowledged his "significant contribution" to the Greek Australian community.
Mr Katsambanis served as president of the World Hellenic Inter-Parliamentary Association from 2017 to 2021.
He was also a vice-president of the Hellenic Community of Western Australia.
His family will provided details in the coming days for his funeral, which will be held in Melbourne.