Nepal-Tibet floods: Almost 3,000 missing as rescuers work through flood devastation - as it happened
Look back on our coverage from Saturday, August 29.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Recap
Here is the latest summary on the disaster:
- At least 676 people have been killed in Nepal and seven in Tibet after deadly flash floods struck villages in the border region between Nepal and Tibet on Wednesday.
- Nearly 3,000 people are missing in Nepal and Tibet, including at least 41 Australians.
- The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is "urgently" seeking an update on the welfare of missing Australians. Foreign Minister Penny Wong says they were part of separate pilgrimages and tour groups. The department's 24-hour Consular Emergency Centre can be reached at 1300 555 135, or +61 2 6261 3305 (if calling from overseas).
- The floods were likely triggered by a large chunk of ice breaking off a Himalayan glacier, according to satellite imagery, sending tonnes of ice and rock tumbling into a river below.
- More than 93,000 people are believed to have been caught up in this disaster and in need of aid, according to the Red Cross.
- If you want to help, the ABC is supporting the Emergency Action Alliance member charities and their local partners. You can find more information here, and make a donation here.
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
Thanks for reading our live blog
This is where we'll end our live coverage of the situation in Nepal today.
As always, you can find our latest stories on Nepal and other breaking news on the ABC News homepage.
Thanks for joining us!
In pictures: The aftermath of the floods in Nepal's Nuwakot district
The search for survivors continues in Nepal's Nuwakot region after a torrent of ice, water and rocks left a path of destruction in its wake.
Reporting with AP
India ramps up monitoring of glaciers
India is increasing monitoring of its Himalayan regions bordering China and Nepal, days after deadly floods apparently triggered by a glacial collapse, authorities have said.
The US Geological Survey said the disaster on the Tibet-Nepal border was caused by a glacial collapse that created a torrent of debris.
While the exact cause of the collapse is unclear, officials in India's Himalayan state of Uttarakhand are monitoring glaciers in their region.
"We have asked our teams to be vigilant and monitor if a similar situation is emerging anywhere in the state," Madan Kaushik, the state's disaster management minister, told news agency AFP.
Uttarakhand is one of the most ecologically sensitive regions of India, with 1,266 glacial lakes, according to government figures.
Himalayan glaciers are melting faster than ever before due to climate change, exposing communities to unpredictable and costly disasters, scientists warn.
- With reporting from AFP
Key Event
Australian woman Cara Severino safely located, Penny Wong says
Australian woman Cara Severino, who had been unaccounted for following the devastating floods along the Nepal-China border, has been safely located, says Foreign Minister Penny Wong.
Ms Severino, who was feared missing in the floods, made contact with her parents yesterday.
"This is a rare piece of positive news amid a disaster that has brought immense loss and uncertainty," Ms Wong said in a statement.
"I have spoken directly with her and am very pleased to know she is safe. She has also spoken with her family, which I know will be a great relief to them."
Australian consular officials travelled by four-wheel-drive from Kathmandu to reach "an accessible checkpoint" on the trekking route Ms Severino was on, and she was being transported to a safe location, Ms Wong said.
In a statement, Ms Severino thanked her fellow Nepali hikers for getting her out safely.
"I'm so grateful for the crew we formed on that first day when we entered the national park on the tractor. Sudha, Lucas, Samir and Saugat. It's thanks to these amazing people I got out safely."
"My heart goes out to all the Nepalese families who are grieving loved ones," she said.
"We passed a guy hiking up to Thulu Safru who lost his whole family when their whole town was destroyed. It's just so devastating and undeserving.
"I feel for the families of those still missing, I know how much my family and friends went through."
Consular teams are liaising with Nepalese authorities on the ground to establish the whereabouts of the Australians who remain unaccounted for, Ms Wong said.
Heartbreaking identification process continues in Kathmandu
Families of those missing are facing the devastating task of having to identify their loved ones through photographs of bodies pasted on the walls of Maharajgunj Medical Campus in Kathmandu.
With the deaths in the deluge having occurred three days ago, authorities said some bodies now being recovered had decomposed beyond recognition.
They would be buried after legal formalities because of health risks and a fear of epidemics.
"DNA samples will be collected, and the bodies will be buried in an open space," the Chitwan district administration said in a notice.
Officials said only seven of 49 bodies brought to the hospital had been identified.
Rescue worker Kawan Koirala, from the Nepal Scout Disaster Response Team, said they were struggling in thick, leg-sucking mud.
"People want their want their family's body back, either dead or alive, but we cannot find them... you can see the mud," he told AFP, exhausted after an 18 hour shift.
Reporting with wires
Key Event
Bad weather halts search and rescue
Nepal has suspended search and rescue operations due to bad weather and has said it needs foreign technical help to cope with the devastating flood that tore through an area bordering Tibet.
"Search and rescue operations have been temporarily halted because it is raining and the weather is foggy," Narendra Pariyar, the top bureaucrat for the badly hit Rasuwa district, told news agency Reuters on Saturday.
The focus is on arranging land transport to move rescued pilgrims to the capital city, Kathmandu, he said.
Nearly 3,000 people are still missing in Nepal and Tibet's Gyirong County after the disaster.
More than 100 people remain trapped inside hydropower tunnel
More than 100 people remain trapped inside a hydropower tunnel in Nepal, three days after massive floods struck the site.
According to a statement from the Nepali prime minister's office, 350 people had already been rescued by the army in "extremely risky" conditions, but more than 100 remained trapped inside the Trishuli 3A Hydropower Project in Rasuwa.
"The government has been continuing efforts ... to rescue people trapped inside the tunnel of the Trishuli 3A Hydropower Project in Rasuwa," the statement read.
You can watch the hydro-tunnel rescue here.
Reporting with AFP
🎥 People rescued from house surrounded by mud
Video footage shows rescue workers using a makeshift bridge to reach people stranded in a house that was left standing after a flash flood and mudslide in Nepal.
Loading...
Footage we shared on this blog earlier today showed the mint-green house miraculously standing as floodwaters rushed past.
A group of people could be seen huddling on its balcony.
Key Event
Hundreds of foreign nationals remain missing
Nearly 3,000 people are missing and at least 626 people have been killed in the deadly flash floods that struck villages in the border region between Nepal and Tibet.
Nepal's disaster agency on Friday said 517 foreigners, which could include tourists as well as foreign workers, were still missing, while Chinese officials put the number of foreigners missing on China's side of the border at 260.
Here are the latest numbers of foreign nationals missing:
- AUSTRALIA: The number of Australians missing has risen to 41.
- INDIA: The Nepal Tourism Board on Friday said 98 people from India were missing, but 85 others were rescued.
- BRITAIN: Thirty-three people from the United Kingdom were missing, the Nepal Tourism Board figures showed.
- CANADA: The Nepal Tourism Board said 25 Canadians were among the missing on Friday. Canada's foreign ministry put the figure at 30 in both Nepal and Tibet.
- CHINA: China's foreign ministry said on Thursday that nearly 100 Chinese nationals were among the missing in Nepal. That was in addition to the 554 still missing on the Chinese side of the border, state news agency Xinhua reported on Saturday.
- MALAYSIA: The Nepal Tourism Board put the number of Malaysians missing at 51.
- NEW ZEALAND: Five New Zealanders remain missing, according to the Nepal Tourism Board.
- SOUTH KOREA: The Nepal Tourism Board said on Friday that nine South Korean tourists were missing, while South Korea's foreign ministry has said they had had no news of nine hydropower workers.
- UKRAINE: The number of Ukrainians still missing on Friday was 61, the Nepal Tourism Board said.
- UNITED STATES: The Nepal Tourism Board put the figure at 65 missing on Friday, and two rescued.
The Nepal Tourism Board also said citizens of Latvia, France, Germany, Spain, Belgium, Hungary, Portugal, Netherlands, Italy, Ireland, Kazakhstan, Belarus, Finland, Israel, Japan, Lithuania, Philippines, Russia, Serbia, Singapore, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, and Vietnam were unaccounted-for.
The missing figure released on Thursday by China from its side of the border did not include a breakdown of nationalities.
Reporting with AFP
Key Event
Vigil for flood victims underway in Adelaide
Hundreds of members of South Australia's Nepali community have come together in Adelaide's south-west for a candlelight vigil to remember the victims of the flooding tragedy.
Gathered in Oaklands Park, they lit candles spelling out the words "Pray for Nepal" and held a moment of silence.
Vigil organiser Thir Gurung said some members of the community still haven't heard from family members in Nepal and hope is quickly fading.
"We couldn't sleep, we can't work, we are in stress," Mr Gurung told crowds.
"At this moment, the Nepalese community wants to come together and pay our respects."
Risk of lake bursting wanes near China-Nepal border disaster site
The threat of a lake bursting near the China-Nepal border has decreased, Chinese authorities say.
The authorities said on Saturday the lake's size appeared to have shrunk.
The lake formed after a glacier collapsed in the location where the devastating flood occurred earlier this week.
Satellite images from Thursday to Saturday morning suggest that water in the lake - straddling the China-Nepal border at the confluence of two rivers - has been slowly flowing through, decreasing the reservoir gradually, state broadcaster CCTV reported citing the water resources ministry.
The ministry said satellite imagery of the surface area of the lake at Purepu Tsangpo river showed it was 99,000 square metres in size on early Saturday morning - about the size of 14 football fields combined - having shrunk by 21,000sqm compared with images from Thursday.
Experts and authorities have warned of the extremely high risk of secondary disasters in the valley, especially from the lake that was formed by glacier debris, potentially endangering rescue operations downstream.
Reporting with Reuters
'Enormous' trauma from disaster, Red Cross warns
Nepal's government has called for aid as it continues to assess the scale of destruction from catastrophic floods, and as the threat of more flooding remains.
Humanitarian organisations have described some of the challenges ahead.
The trauma of Wednesday's flash flood had been "enormous", with as many as 93,000 people potentially affected in the country of about 30 million, the Red Cross said.
Entire communities have been swept away, leaving families homeless or sheltering in temporary facilities.
"Multiple bridges have been washed away and major roads disrupted, leaving some of the worst-affected communities extremely difficult to reach," the Red Cross said.
At least 18 schools have been destroyed and another 20 damaged, leaving about 10,000 school-age children affected, according to the United Nations Children's Fund.
The floods destroyed three health posts and partially damaged a hospital, with access to two other hospitals affected, according to the UN's World Health Organization (WHO).
"Displacement, overcrowding, damaged water and sanitation systems, and disrupted health services may increase the risk of communicable diseases," the WHO said.
Reporting with AFP
Key Event
Vigils held in Sydney tonight
A number of people from the Nepalese community have gathered in Sydney's CBD this evening for a candlelight vigil.
The event is being held at Martin Place and was organised by the Non-Resident Nepali Association.
NSW Coordinator Usha Bariya told the ABC the disaster has left many in Australia struggling to process what they're seeing from afar.
"It's actually heartbreaking. But at the same time, we are giving that hope ... all the rescue team is over there to find some leads to help them out," Ms Bariya said.
Other candlelight vigils are being held across the city, at both Tallawong and Canterbury.
More to come.
Key Event
Eleven missing Australians from Sydney's Tamil community
Sydney Tamil community leader Anagan Babu says the friends and families of Australia's missing are anxious but hopeful.
The Tamil Arts and Culture Association president says 11 of the missing Australians are from Sydney's Tamil community.
He says the community is in pain but remains hopeful for good news, urging authorities in Nepal and in Australia to do everything they can to find the missing.
"These numbers are not just numbers," he says.
"They are the parents, brothers, sisters and friends.
"They have to do whatever they can do so they can find the whereabouts and exact information of this."
Key Event
Two more missing Australians identified
Sydney couple Uday Shivamurthy, 60, and Kripa Shivamurthy, 55, can now be identified among the Australians still missing in the Nepal-Tibet flood disaster.
The Shivamurthys are devout followers of Indian spiritual leader Sadhguru and had travelled to the region on a pilgrimage to Mount Kailash.
Sadhguru's Isha Foundation told the ABC the Shivamurthys were last heard from at Chinese immigration on Wednesday, after completing their pilgrimage.
For family and friends waiting for news in Sydney, the uncertainty has been agonising.
Dr Pankaj Arora and Deepti Arora, close friends of the couple for more than two decades, said they were "still in shock" but had not given up hope.
"This news has shaken our whole community, and we are at the moment focused on making sure that their two children are being supported through these hard times," they said.
Nepal's flood damage may cost up to a tenth of its economy to rebuild
Nepal may need up to $US5 billion ($6.9 billion) to rebuild after this week's devastating floods, Nepal's Finance Minister, Swarnim Wagle, has told Reuters.
That would be a bill equal to nearly a tenth of Nepal's economy.
"The initial estimate is between $4-$5 billion ... we will require much less than what we needed for the 2015 earthquake. Loss and damage is being assessed," he said.
Mr Wagle did not elaborate on why the reconstruction bill was expected to be less than the $US9 billion spent after the 2015 magnitude-7.8 quake.
That disaster, Nepal's worst on record, killed nearly 9,000 people, destroyed more than half a million homes and caused losses estimated to have been about a third of Nepal's economy.
The recent floods will nevertheless be a major blow to an economy reliant on remittances, tourism and hydropower, damaging power projects that account for more than 12 per cent of national generating capacity.
Reporting with Reuters
Desperate search for missing loved ones
Crowds of people are gathering at the gates of the Tribhuvan University Teaching Hospital in Kathmandu, in the hope they will find information about their missing loved ones.
Hung next to the pictures of the deceased are smiling photos of those who are missing - remnants of better days.
Friends and family are taking matters into their own hands, posting pictures of the people they are searching for.
Police and volunteers are set up at desks taking the names and numbers of those who have missing relatives.
Some people come here multiple times a day in the desperate hope they will receive good news.
More than 400 injured people, airlifted from the disaster area, have been brought here.
Chief of the emergency medicine department Ramesh Kumar Maharjan said most of those patients had been buried in mud.
Watch: The landslide news that's not available in China
China has been censoring information about the Tibet landslide disaster and won't allow foreign journalists to go there to report independently.
It makes it hard to understand the scale of catastrophe and to hear from those Tibetans affected; while across the border in Nepal, journalists have been given free access.
The ABC's China correspondent Allyson Horn explains the situation below:
Loading...
Family of missing Brisbane woman heads to Kathmandu
Brisbane woman Suhasini Reddy Kandimalla is also missing in Nepal.
Sister-in-law Lauren Reddy said Ms Kandimalla, a New Zealand citizen who has lived in Australia for the past four years, was last seen heading towards the border.
She was supposed to arrive at 8:44am on Wednesday, local time, but the flood hit just minutes earlier, Ms Reddy said.
The family is headed to Kathmandu to find the much-loved Mum of two.
"We are heading to Nepal and would appreciate any support on the ground that we can get from local authorities," Ms Reddy said.
Missing Australian's family and friends appeal for information
Bharat Mangwani is one of the missing Australians in the Nepal-Tibet flood disaster.
Kushagra Tiwari, a friend Mr Mangwani, told the ABC his group was last in contact with their tour organisers about 10 minutes before the floods hit.
Mr Mangwani, from Kellyville in Sydney's north-west, had travelled from Sydney to Mansarovar as part of a pilgrimage with the Sadhguru Isha Foundation.
Mr Tiwari said he had been told his friend of 20 years was headed to an immigration building on the Nepal-Tibet border on his way back to Kathmandu before the natural disaster.
Mr Mangwani, a father of two, was due home Sunday, and his friends and relatives are urgently appealing for information.
Mr Mangwani's wife, Neha Mangwani, has flown to Nepal to search for her husband.
Speaking through Mr Tiwari, she made a desperate plea for the Australian government to assist in search efforts.