Katanning hostel rapist Dennis McKenna set to be released from jail under strict conditions
Wed 29 Jul 2026 at 6:14pm
, updatedWed 29 Jul 2026 at 6:24pm
In short:
One of WA's worst serial paedophiles, Dennis McKenna, is expected to be released from prison under strict supervision later this year.
The 81-year-old, who abused dozens of boys at a regional hostel, is nearing the end of his 15-and-a-half-year prison sentence.
What's next?
Both the prosecution and defence agree McKenna is a high-risk offender, with a final decision on his future to be made at a later hearing.
One of Western Australia's worst serial paedophiles appears set to be released from prison under strict supervision, as prosecutors argue he is a high-risk serious offender.
Dennis John McKenna abused dozens of boys in the 1970s and 80s while in charge of St Andrew's Hostel, a student boarding accommodation facility in the town of Katanning, about 290 kilometres south-east of Perth.
McKenna's brazen and repetitive offending was revealed over the course of four separate court cases between 1991 and 2015.
He was denied parole in 2024, and prosecutors have since sought to have the serial paedophile declared a High Risk Serious Offender (HRSO), which could have kept the octogenarian behind bars for the rest of his life.
In court today, the prosecution argued McKenna should be declared an HRSO, but could be released from prison under strict conditions.
That could happen as soon as November, as McKenna completes his 15-and-a-half-year sentence.
Reoffending risk 'low' despite 'distorted views'
McKenna, 81, watched on via video link from Acacia Prison dressed in a green jumper with short, thinning grey hair. He spoke only to confirm his name.
Prosecutor Brett Tooker told the court McKenna posed "an unacceptable risk that he will commit a serious offence ... against a male child."
The court heard from one forensic psychiatrist who considered his risk of reoffending was "low", primarily due to his advanced age and lack of offending in the 17 years between his 1991 and 2011 jail sentences.
Forensic psychiatrist Peter Wynn Owen, who interviewed McKenna twice for around five hours over the past year, said the serial paedophile continued to "categorically" deny any offending after 1981.
"[He] attributes blame to victims, suggests victims in fact instigated aspects of the offending," he said.
"If an individual is denying offending, it suggests they are not going to be able to engage with treatment."
Mr Wynn Owen said McKenna continued to hold distorted views that in his mind minimised or justified his offending.
"This distortion ... enabled him to continue to offend over a long period of time," he said.
McKenna 'knows how vilified he is'
McKenna's lawyer Joel Grinceri said he saw "no reason" why McKenna needed to see victim submissions tended to the court and didn't anticipate he would seek to view them.
"He is well aware of his notoriety in the community and he is essentially a man with no friends,"Mr Grinceri said.
"His family has abandoned him and he has been in custody for many years now.
"There is, obviously, on his behalf significant trepidation at the prospect of being released in the community, knowing how vilified he is and how notorious he is in the community.
"He is scared himself in that regard."
Loading...Mr Wynn Owen told the court he had significant concerns about McKenna's proposed address following release, given he would be sharing a home with a fellow offender.
"Mr McKenna is a very isolated man and will remain isolated other than [with] this individual," he said.
"To live with another offender who is also a denier would potentially increase his risk [and] is likely to reduce his compliance with supervision and monitoring."
Victims got 'life sentences'
Among those eager to be present for the decision on McKenna's future was Kaye Anderson.
Three of Ms Anderson's five children attended St Andrew's, with Ray and Quenton both reporting they were sexually abused during their stay between 1985 and 1987.
Ray later took his own life, while Quenton died from drug and alcohol abuse.
Ms Anderson said McKenna will never be able to remedy the harm caused to her family.
"My kids got death sentences, so did others. Those kids he abused, they got life sentences.
"They never got parole; they had to live with that.
"McKenna should be the same. No release from jail whatsoever."
Whistleblower Maggie Dawkins said she too was disappointed McKenna will likely walk free.
"We're going to have probably 40 different clauses. He's got to wear one of those electronic bracelets and all that sort of stuff," she said.
"But he's still out, isn't he?
"That's using police resources that they've got to monitor all the time, when that could be better spent elsewhere."
McKenna's lawyer and the prosecutor agreed about the need to declare him a High Risk Serious Offender and that he should be subject to a supervision order.
The specifics of those conditions were being negotiated. A final decision on McKenna's future will be made at a later court hearing.