In short:
At least a handful of people have already been banned from protesting at a major defence conference next week in Perth.
WA Police has been given additional temporary powers to manage the expo after new legislation was passed last month.
Activists and the Greens have criticised the police for a "lack of transparency".
A handful of people have already been banned from protesting at a major defence conference in Perth, nearly a week before it gets underway, as Western Australian police put their specially enhanced powers to use.
New legislation was passed last month to provide police with temporary powers to manage the Land Forces event, which opens next Tuesday at the Perth Convention and Exhibition Centre with an expected 20,000 delegates.
The ABC understands at least six people have received letters from police advising them that they have been banned from protesting inside the security zone.
Authorities have refused to reveal why they have been targeted.
A letter seen by the ABC warned the recipient that they could be arrested and jailed for three years, as well as fined $36,000 for entering the security area.
The WA government has said the additional powers given to police are aimed at preventing a repeat of the ugly clashes seen outside Melbourne's Land Forces expo in 2024.
They come into effect today until October 10 to provide appropriate security for the expo's duration, including its set-up and pack down.
Those on the banned list will be allowed to protest outside the security zone.
Several groups, including the WA Anti-War Collective and the Greens, have said they would protest against the event.
Specially enhanced powers
Within the security zone, which encompasses the Convention Centre and Elizabeth Quay bus port, police can stop and search and evict whoever they choose.
Police Minister Reece Whitby described the security measures for Land Forces as the "biggest police operation" in the state due to a "heightened security environment".
"What we want to see is this event occur safely ... we will not tolerate what occurred in Melbourne at the last Land Forces," he said.
"This is all about keeping Western Australians safe. This is an important event for Western Australia strategically, commercially, for a whole other range of reasons."
WA Police Commander Darren Seivwright said the legislation was "judiciously applied" to determine who was excluded.
"It is case by case, we've set the threshold particularly high,"
"Those that have been excluded have earned it through previous suboptimal behaviour, and if there's any similar behaviour during the event, they will join the excluded person's list."
When asked why people have been issued bans, he indicated some had behavioural problems including "criminal histories".
Protesters owed reasons for bans
Activists have slammed the police powers and what they call a lack of transparency.
Greens MLC Sophie McNeill said police were "trying to stop protests" by targeting "peaceful activists who have no history of violence".
"We know some of these individuals who have received these letters, and they have no history of any violent protest," Ms McNeill said.
"This is an incredible waste of police resources at a time we're facing a domestic violence crisis in this state."
Human Rights Law Centre senior lawyer Rohan Simpson said police "owe it to protesters" to give reasons for the bans.
"If you are being told by police that you can't attend a particular event and therefore you can't exercise your right to protest and express your political opinion, then the onus is on police to explain why they think you're a threat," he said.
"The notices that people have received today, and I've seen quite a few of them, they're just generic template letters."
Mr Simpson said he had "serious concerns" about the laws and the way they are being applied.
"The right to protest is fundamental to our democracy and anti-war activists play a really important role in exposing the use of weapons in human rights abuses around the world."