In short:
Award-winning photographer and former Darwin councillor Paul Arnold has been sentenced to a two-year intensive community corrections order over a string of domestic violence offences.
He was found guilty on more than a dozen charges related to multiple incidents involving his former girlfriend.
What's next?
Arnold will spend nine months in home detention and has been ordered to complete a men's behavioural change program.
Renowned Australian landscape photographer and former Darwin councillor Paul Arnold has avoided jail despite being convicted of a string of domestic violence charges described by a judge as "serious", "cowardly" and "insidious".
Arnold was today sentenced in the Darwin Local Court to a two-year intensive community corrections order (ICCO), with nine months to be served under home detention.
In November last year, Arnold was found guilty on more than a dozen charges, including assault, deprivation of liberty and damage to property.
The bulk of the offences related to seven separate incidents that occurred over the course of his troubled 18-month relationship with his former partner, Leanne Thompson, before the pair separated in early 2023.
Arnold, 54, was also charged with and later convicted of aggravated stalking and breaching a domestic violence order.
'No remorse at all', judge finds
In sentencing Arnold today, Darwin Local Court Judge Therese Austin said the offending was a "serious example" of domestic violence, describing his conduct as "insidious", "controlling" and "nasty".
Judge Austin said the offending had resulted in "ongoing and profound" impacts on the victim, including "physical, psychological and emotional harm".
"I find there is no remorse at all for the harm you have inflicted on Ms Thompson,"
During one incident in August 2022, the court heard Arnold pushed Ms Thompson into a towel rack, headbutted her and threw her make-up bag on the ground, which Judge Austin described as an act of "unacceptable violence".
"I find the headbutt is a particularly nasty and cowardly assault that was a shocking and painful experience for Ms Thompson," she said.
In a separate event, Arnold took Ms Thompson's phone and blocked her from leaving his bedroom.
Arnold pleaded guilty to two counts of damage to property but not guilty to all other charges, and during his evidence he denied ever being physically violent toward Ms Thompson.
During her sentencing remarks, Judge Austin said parts of Arnold's evidence were "so implausible, unbelievable, and uncredible (sic)" there was "no reasonable possibility" they were true.
Arnold served as a City of Darwin councillor for three years before resigning in May 2023.
He was also the owner of a gallery in Darwin's CBD which has since collapsed financially.
'It gave me back my voice'
During the proceedings, Ms Thompson forfeited her right have her identity concealed as a protected witness, instead choosing to give evidence in front of her abuser.
Speaking outside court today, Ms Thompson said she wanted people to "see the face behind the headlines".
"I am a real person, I have feelings, I have emotions, I am a mother," she said.
"Despite being educated and strong, domestic violence happened to me."
After enduring a years-long court process, Ms Thompson said it was worth the fight.
"It gave me back my voice, my safety and showed me I'm far stronger than I ever believed.
"I leave today knowing I have done everything in my power to stop this happening to someone else."
Arnold's barrister, Jon Tippett KC, previously told the court his client had suffered extra punishment due to negative media coverage of the case and had suffered a major decline in his mental health.
Today, Judge Austin acknowledged Arnold had been subject to "a degree of public humiliation" but found the attention was "to be expected" as a result of his standing in the community.
She accepted Arnold was "labouring under severe depression" and his mental illness would make prison "more onerous" for him.
Judge Austin said while Arnold would not serve any actual prison time, the ICCO was a "strict regime".
Arnold was also ordered to complete a men's behavioural change program.