NRL wrap: Brisbane's season all but over after Cowboys claim Queensland derby
Brisbane's premiership defence is done and dusted after North Queensland kept their own finals hopes on track with a deserved 18-10 derby win in Townsville.
The Broncos are set to be the first defending NRL premiers to miss the finals since 2005 champions Wests Tigers missed the top eight in 2006.
Their season of dismal failure was crushed in front of a sold-out crowd in Townsville on Saturday night by a Cowboys outfit brilliantly led up front by club legend Jason Taumalolo.
Brisbane, on 18 points, are now four wins outside the eight and there is a remote "mathematical chance" of making finals, but even if they were to win all remaining six games the best they can finish with is 12 victories.
That simply won't be enough to play finals. Brisbane's for and against is so poor at -132 that even a collapse by the teams ahead of them would not be of any help to their cause.
Coach Michael Maguire is set to come under further scrutiny for his failure to get results from his superstar roster.
"I'm pretty shattered for my players and staff ... but it just hasn't been our time," Maguire said.
"We have six games to go and we will focus on the next one."
The Cowboys, in eighth position on 26 points, had all the best players in key positions - including Taumalolo trumping Payne Haas.
North Queensland halfback Jake Clifford was left out of the starting side last week, but returned with a bang with his kicking game the best on either side.
Cowboys centre Tom Chester was scintillating and fullback Scott Drinkwater played with the composure that Broncos opposite number Reece Walsh lacked.
North Queensland coach Todd Payten lit the fuse before the clash with his statement that "everyone hates the Broncos" and his players delivered.
"I'm very happy for the team, the town and the club," Payten said.
"It was a good performance by our lads. We started fast and physical."
The hosts also dealt with adversity far better.
Cowboys hooker Reed Mahoney was concussed and ruled out in the seventh minute.
Taumalolo, in his 31st derby clash, rumbled through the middle of the Broncos and five-eighth Jaxon Purdue's pinpoint grubber was swooped upon by forward Heilum Luki for the opening try.
Broncos No.6 Ezra Mam had the perfect riposte with a grubber of his own for edge forward Xavier Willison to score out wide.
Both sides bombed tries over the line, but on the cusp of halftime Drinkwater's cutout pass sent winger Braidon Burns steaming down the touchline. He came to Walsh and knocked him clean over before offloading to Clifford for a 14-4 lead.
The Cowboys got out to a 12-point lead before Walsh forced an error from Burns with a towering bomb. The Broncos fullback threw the money ball for Mam to power his way over to score a cracker.
Mam went within a whisker of adding another, but Brisbane winger Josiah Karapani gave away a penalty and the hosts went back out to an eight-point lead.
The Broncos' most experienced players Adam Reynolds and Ben Hunt were off the pace in the big moments.
Cowboys co-captain Reuben Cotter was awarded the Carl Webb Medal as man of the match, in honour of the late legend of both clubs who lost his battle with Motor Neurone Disease in 2023.
There was a lot of heat in the match with North Queensland trio Griffin Neame, Purdue and Heilum Luki all on report, while Brisbane duo Preston Riki and Kotoni Staggs were also booked.
In the day's other matches both Canterbury (18-6) and Canberra (56-10) kept their finals hopes alive with wins over the Warriors and Tigers, respectively.
Re-live the action in our live blog below, keep up to date with all the latest stats in our ScoreCentre, and tune in to our live radio coverage.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 10:47pm
Signing off
That'll do us after a big day of rugby league action, thanks for stopping by.
Until next time.
LoadingKey Event
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 10:46pm
Match report: Cowboys all but end Brisbane's premiership defence
Brisbane's premiership defence is done and dusted after North Queensland kept their own finals hopes on track with a deserved 18-10 derby win in Townsville.
The Broncos are set to be the first defending NRL premiers to miss the finals since 2005 champions Wests Tigers missed the top eight in 2006.
Their season of dismal failure was crushed in front of a sold-out crowd in Townsville on Saturday night by a Cowboys outfit brilliantly led up front by club legend Jason Taumalolo.
Brisbane, on 18 points, are now four wins outside the eight and there is a remote "mathematical chance" of making finals, but even if they were to win all remaining six games the best they can finish is with 12 victories.
That simply won't be enough to play finals. Brisbane's for and against is so poor at -132 that even a collapse by the teams ahead of them would not be of any help to their cause.
Coach Michael Maguire is set to come under further scrutiny for his failure to get results from his superstar roster.
The Cowboys, in eighth position on 26 points, had all the best players in key positions - including Taumalolo trumping Payne Haas.
North Queensland halfback Jake Clifford was left out of the starting side last week, but returned with a bang with his kicking game the best on either side.
Cowboys centre Tom Chester was scintillating and fullback Scott Drinkwater played with the composure that Broncos opposite number Reece Walsh lacked.
North Queensland coach Todd Payten lit the fuse before the clash with his statement that "everyone hates the Broncos" and his players delivered.
The hosts also dealt with adversity far better.
Cowboys hooker Reed Mahoney was concussed and ruled out in the seventh minute.
Taumalolo, in his 31st derby clash, rumbled through the middle of the Broncos and five-eighth Jaxon Purdue's pinpoint grubber was swooped upon by forward Heilum Luki for the opening try.
Broncos No.6 Ezra Mam had the perfect riposte with a grubber of his own for edge forward Xavier Willison to score out wide.
Both sides bombed tries over the line, but on the cusp of halftime Drinkwater's cutout pass sent winger Braidon Burns steaming down the touchline.
He came to Walsh and knocked him clean over before offloading to Clifford for a 14-4 lead.
The Cowboys got out to a 12-point lead before Walsh forced an error from Burns with a towering bomb. The Broncos fullback threw the money ball for Mam to power his way over to score a cracker.
Mam went within a whisker of adding another, but Brisbane winger Josiah Karapani gave away a penalty and the hosts went back out to an eight-point lead.
The Broncos' most experienced players Adam Reynolds and Ben Hunt were off the pace in the big moments.
Cowboys co-captain Reuben Cotter was awarded the Carl Webb Medal as man of the match, in honour of the late legend of both clubs who lost his battle with Motor Neurone Disease in 2023.
There was a lot of heat in the match with North Queensland trio Griffin Neame, Purdue and Heilum Luki all on report, while Brisbane duo Preston Riki and Kotoni Staggs were also booked.
AAP
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 10:09pm
Brisbane press conference
Broncos coach Michael Maguire is speaking now. He's pretty tight-lipped about the club's finals chances and says they'll be focused on sending off the departing players well.
"We crossed the line a number of times, we just couldn't get the try," Maguire said.
"The players and staff have worked hard to give us the opportunity. You look back and reflect on what could have been, but at the end of the day we are where we are."
Key Event
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 9:29pm
Fulltime: Cowboys 18 def Broncos 10
North Queensland repel the final Brisbane attack as Riki knocks it on and the Cowboys win. The Broncos premiership defence is all but over.
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 9:22pm
75' Broncos lose challenge
Mariner loses sight of a bomb in contest with Taulagi and knocks it on, Brisbane will challenge though.
Big one, this. If the Broncos get it they'll still be alive. If not, the Cowboys will have a chance to kill the game off.
They won't get it either. Cowboy ball, inside the 20. A try here will be the end.
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 9:12pm
67' Cowboys edge ahead
Reynolds goes short off the drop out and it bounces back and touches Karapani before it goes ten, it'll be a Cowboys penalty right in front.
They take the two again to stretch the lead to 18-10.
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 9:10pm
65' Traffic goes both ways
Nanai makes a clean break through the middle of the field, he's flying downfield and takes on Walsh but loses the ball as he falls to ground!
Walsh picks it up and he takes off in the other direction only for Clifford to take him down in a super cover tackle! The ref rules Walsh had taken his advantage so it's a net gain for the Cowboys and they're on the attack.
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 9:07pm
Injury: Gehamet Shibasaki
The Broncos star centre is being assisted off with what looks like an ankle injury.
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 9:02pm
58' Bronx nearly score an all-timer
Reynolds kicks for Mariner deep in Brisbane's half and he's away down the sideline before kicking inside, the Broncos are queuing up but Mam can't drag it in!
That would have been one of the tries of the season! Cowboys ball.
Key Event
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 9:00pm
56' Mam pulls one back for Brisbane
Walsh puts up a spiral bomb and Burns can't take it. Brisbane get some field position for the first time since the break.
A set restart helps them build some pressure. Walsh links with Mam, he twists his way through a few defenders and dives over to score!
Great footy from both of them, Mam's had a strong game tonight. Reynolds hits the kick and it's 16-10.
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 8:54pm
A record crowd in North Queensland
A new house record in North Queensland with 25,461 punters packing into the ground.
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 8:53pm
49' Cowboys take two more
Penalty against Staggs for tackling Laybutt in the air, Cowboys have a fresh set inside the 20.
No they won't, they'll take the two - Drinkwater makes no mistake and it's 16-4 to the home side.
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 8:46pm
Second half is underway in Townsville
And we're halfway home.
Key Event
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 8:39pm
Match report: New dad Crichton leads the way for Canterbury
Stephen Crichton has capped his newfound fatherhood by leading Canterbury to a 18-6 win over the Warriors on his return from injury.
Crichton was stretchered off Stadium Australia on a medi-cab a fortnight ago with nerve damage in his neck, but made a triumphant comeback at the same venue on Saturday night to supercharge the Bulldogs' finals hopes.
The 25-year-old's performance - in which he scored a try and kicked three goals - came less than 24 hours after his partner Leone welcomed their first child.
Crichton, returning in the five-eighth role he was re-deployed in midway through this season, grabbed the Dogs' first try of the night when he backed up a Viliame Kikau offload and celebrated with a rocking baby motion.
The Crichton try set the wheels in motion for another impressive victory for Cameron Ciraldo's men, who have five wins in their last six outings and are knocking on the door for a spot in the top eight.
What would please Ciraldo the most was Canterbury's desperation in defence, with only a late Chanel Harris-Tavita try preventing the Warriors from going home scoreless.
And while this was a night of celebration for the Bulldogs, the Warriors blew a golden chance to cut Penrith's lead in the race for the minor premiership.
Warriors coach Andrew Webster was visibly angered as his side toiled and the sight of seeing fullback Taine Tuaupiki limping off in a moon boot would have only added to his frustration.
Crichton followed his sixth-minute opener by backing up a Jacob Kiraz break, which led to the Dogs swinging it left and then back to Lachlan Galvin on the right.
Galvin went to his favoured play - a short ball to Jacob Preston - and it worked wonders with the back-rower charging in to give the Dogs a 12-0 halftime lead.
Kiraz scored off a scrum play to push Canterbury further ahead after the break, Crichton missing the touchline conversion but making amends with a penalty goal.
Mitch Barnett was the surprising catalyst for the visitors' sole try in the 75th minute when the prop chipped over the top for Harris-Tavita to regather and score.
AAP
Key Event
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 8:29pm
Halftime: Cowboys 14 lead Broncos 4
Drinkwater fires a great ball to Burns, he's away down the sideline, steps inside and absolutley trucks Walsh before picking up Clifford in support to score!
Sensational footy from the Cows and once Drinkwater converts it's 14-4 Cowboys.
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 8:23pm
36' Cows take two more
Riki runs Clifford off the ball and the Cowboys have an easy two. They'll take them, and it's 8-4 North Queensland.
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 8:19pm
33' Broncos can't follow Walsh magic
Walsh cuts through some soft defence through the middle, he has Mam in support but the cover drags him down.
Hunt throws a shocking ball from dummy half that Burns picks off and the Cowboys hang on.
Meanwhile, Cotter goes for an HIA after catching a boot from Walsh whilst making the tackle.
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 8:17pm
32' Cowboys nearly get in
Hess and Clifford fly high after a Drinkwater kick and the Cowboys are claiming one!
It's a bit of a mess, we go to the video but Hess dropped as he tried to come down with the ball. Geez he got up there, that was like Hess from ten years ago.
Bronco ball.
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 8:15pm
31' Broncos bomb one
Mam puts a kick in and Shibasaki is there first but he can't gather it in! Oh, that's a try gone begging!
It was the exact same pattern as their try but this time they can't convert. Cowboys ball.
Sat 25 Jul 2026 at 8:12pm
Injury: Adam Reynolds
The veteran halfback is off for an HIA with Ben Hunt replacing him.