My Brilliant Career is a story that has stayed with actress Philippa Northeast for years.
Northeast rediscovered the 1901 Miles Franklin novel as a teenager, after her mother first read it to her when she was a child.
"I was [about] 10, and illiterate," Northeast told ABC News.
"[I was] way too young to be having this book read to [me] ... but what it did establish in me from a young age is this is a really important book to my mum."
Northeast (Territory, The Newsreader) plays Sybylla in the upcoming Netflix series, a young woman who wants to be a writer, while her family is determined to marry her off.
She breaks every convention as she looks for a story that will allow her to write her way to independence.
The tension comes when she falls in love. Will she marry, or risk it all for a creative life?
"To see a woman living life on her own terms, I think, has been a saving grace for a lot of people,"
"And that's been more than iconic; it's so incredibly essential, and that was the case with my mum."
Northeast was speaking to ABC News at an intimate luncheon celebrating the series, which is out on Thursday.
She says when she landed the role of Sybylla, there was one person she knew she had to call straight away.
"I called Mum, because I knew it was special, and she hung up on me immediately,"
"And then she rang back later to say that she just had to cry in the car and have her own moment with the information I'd given her."
'It will bust your heart open'
My Brilliant Career has been adapted for stage and screen before, including Gillian Armstrong's 1979 film starring Judy Davis as Sybylla and Sam Neill as suitor Harry Beecham.
There was an outpouring of tributes when Neill died suddenly last month. He was 78.
In the Netflix adaptation, Harry is played by Christopher Chung (Slow Horses, Blitz).
Kate Mulvany (Hunters, Elvis) takes on the role of Augusta, Harry's aunt, who brings him up when he is orphaned as a boy.
"Sam was a dear friend of mine," Mulvany told ABC News.
"And I had the enormous privilege of calling him when I got the role and saying, 'Hey, I'm playing your aunt, can you believe that?'
"And he immediately wanted to know who was playing Harry Beecham, and he was so thrilled when Chris was cast, he was a big Slow Horses fan."
Mulvany says the two would send messages to each other, often via her.
"I was the very happy middle person in the Chris Chung/Sam Neill sandwich, getting to relay the messages between the two Harrys, between the two eras," Mulvany said.
"And I'm so sad that Sam won't get to see this iteration of My Brilliant Career, but he was very present in the shooting.
"He was texting constantly and wanting to know all the gossip, and I think he'd be really proud of what Chris brings to Harry Beecham."
Mulvany says the series is "a celebration of rebellion".
"It's got a real rebel heart to it," she says.
"It's got a feminist rebel heart, but every single person has a bit of Sybylla in them, no matter who you are.
"And in the era of AI, and jobs being taken from artists, this is a pure artist standing up for her craft and saying, 'I want to do this; let me do this.'
"It's also romantic, and sexy and dramatic and sad, and it will bust your heart open."
A world expanded
Miah Madden (Paper Dolls, The Clearing) plays Betty, a young First Nations woman who is new to the story in this iteration of the narrative.
"I think that this series has a lot of potential to be able to reflect a period of Australian history that has been told before, but we are broadening that perspective to include a true reflection of that time," Madden told ABC News.
"And I think that Australian audiences and the Australian population are ready for a story like this.
"I think it's definitely a correction of the original text because I think these perspectives - these First Nations, Chinese, queer perspectives - have always been there and it's wonderful for us to be defiant and showcase those stories."
Shari Sebbens, a stage director and actress (The Sapphires, The Office), is an associate producer on the show and says Liz Doran, who adapted the story for the small screen as a writer and one of the executive producers, was determined to include other cultures and stories.
"Liz wanted to make sure there was First Nations representation because I think it's really odd when we tell Australian stories, especially this early - this is set around Federation - and you can't tell that story without First Nations presence or at least acknowledging First Nations absence," Sebbens told ABC News.
"So, in that way I think the defiance in this production lives in the expansion of Miles Franklin's world, which I know when you read the book, people will say there was racism that was of its time, but it's still of this time.
"That racism that existed then is the racism that exists today; it hasn't evolved."
Sebbens says My Brilliant Career still resonates 125 years on because women are still coming up against glass ceilings, no matter their cultural background.
"One hundred and twenty-five years is a long time," Sebbens says.
"It's also a blip in the long line of societies and cultures that have existed, and women's roles have changed so much because the patriarchy decided to take over, but I think that's what it is.
"It's about women today still being okay to want something and want it out loud and want it with all their heart and being met with resistance at so many points in their life."
My Brilliant Career will stream on Netflix globally from this Thursday, August 13.