Collingwood defeats Adelaide by 34 as Isaac Quaynor cops crowd boos
Collingwood coach Craig McRae reckons it's "fascinating" why the Adelaide Oval crowd booed Isaac Quaynor.
And his Crows counterpart Matthew Nicks said it's "not ideal" that the Magpie defender was again jeered by spectators.
Quaynor was the target of a homophobic slur from Adelaide's Izak Rankine in an August 16 game last year that resulted in a four-game ban for the star Crow.
Yet the Magpie defender was booed by sections of the Adelaide Oval crowd during Collingwood's 34-point win on Thursday night.
"It's a fascinating narrative around why they would boo him," McRae said after his side's 16.12 (108) to 11.8 (74) triumph.
"My understanding is he was a victim of a homophobic slur - and he's getting booed for that.
"It's a fascinating world we live in."
McRae sought out Adelaide's Rankine after the final siren.
"I said: 'Mate, we've got great respect for you'," the coach said.
"People are allowed to make mistakes; they are, we're all human. I've got great respect for him. He's a sensational player.
"And I don't know him as a person, but the way he stood up ... took it on the shoulders or whatever, however you want to put it, there's something to be said about that.
"That's life, isn't it: make a mistake, fix it, or get on with it and improve yourself."
McRae's 10-year-old daughter Charlie was in the Adelaide Oval media room as the coach commented.
"I teach her: we don't boo, that's all I can control," he said.
"People pay their money and they do what they like when they come to a game.
"I teach my children that we don't boo. We show respect to all people."
Crows boss Nicks, on the eve of the match, called for supporters to be respectful in what was Rankine's first game against the Magpies since his suspension.
"I mentioned it during the week about why we play footy, why people come to the footy," Nicks said post-match.
"It's about entertainment, it's about enjoyment, passion. The game is a passionate game and sometimes we lose our way in that a little.
"It's not ideal, the way it played out tonight."
Daicos masterclass shakes up finals picture
Another Nick Daicos masterclass propelled Collingwood to a comeback 34-point away victory over Adelaide.
Daicos (39 disposals, one goal) helped the Magpies overturn a 25-point second-quarter deficit.
Collingwood extended their winning streak to six games and climbed to seventh on the ladder.
Adelaide great Taylor Walker kicked his 700th career goal but the fifth-placed Crows blew a chance to rise to third spot.
Adelaide held a 25-point lead nine minutes into the second term, when Walker had already booted three majors.
But the Magpies climbed from the canvas in style, scoring 13 of the next 16 goals to stun the 50,109-strong Adelaide Oval crowd.
Daicos was instrumental, as were ruckman Darcy Cameron (23 disposals, six clearances, 37 hitouts) and veteran Scott Pendlebury (29 touches, one goal).
Magpies Dan McStay, Tim Membrey and Ed Allan kicked two goals each, and defender Isaac Quaynor (20 possessions) and 200-gamer Jordan De Goey (20, one goal) were also standouts.
Adelaide's Walker couldn't add to his early three goals while Riley Thilthorpe also finished with three.
Crow Sam Berry collected 30 disposals and 10 clearances, Izak Rankine - facing the Pies for the first time since his homophobic slur suspension - had 25 touches, and defenders Wayne Milera (24 possessions) and Josh Worrell (21, seven marks) were busy.
Look back how the action unfolded in our live blog.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 7:27pm
Crows vs Magpies final score
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 10:42pm
That's where we'll leave the blog tonight
A good night to be black and white then. The Pies are on the charge with September looming, and the Crows have got some work to do.
We'll be back tomorrow night for a Friday night double-header, and I hope you'll join us again then. Goodnight!
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 10:41pm
Craig McRae has spoken
The Collingwood coach had a chat with Fox Footy. Here is a bit from that:
"Our forwards started getting up the ground a bit too high. Our contest balance was out of whack. The free kick count was horrendous at half-time. We just had to be a bit more patient, and then a few subtle tweaks which got us back into the game.
"We showed the footy world we play for each other against Gold Coast when [Maynard] was involved in that incident. Our spirit travels, we look after each other.
"Momentum is a big thing. Honestly I thought we were long odds to beat the Crows tonight, but we've got some young guys finding their way and we are playing like a team right now.
"[On the Quaynor booing] I'm just not sure how the world works when someone has been vilified [and is then booed]. I would love to protect our boys, but it's a really strange one for me. I'm just not sure how that how works in this world we live in."
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 10:27pm
The Nick Daicos night
Sorry to do it to you, but I'm going to have to drop the Nick Daicos statline here.
- 39 disposals (game-high)
- 608 metres gained (game-high)
- Seven clearances (team-high)
- Ten score involvements (game-high)
- 18 contested possessions (game-high)
- 19 uncontested possessions (second game-high)
- One goal (it was very good)
- Three Brownlow votes (or something is wrong)
He'll be doing this for another decade too, at least. Might win seven Brownlows.
Key Event
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 10:14pm
FT: Collingwood 16.12 (108) def Adelaide 11.8 (74)
I think you officially don't want to play Collingwood right now. This is now a run of form that is getting stronger with every week, and the way they are playing seems to be the kind of footy that wins finals (and wildcard games, I guess).
Tough, fast, creative, physical and brave, this was Collingwood at their best. Better yet, they had to wear a few early punches from the Crows before steadying and responding on the fly.
Adelaide, for their part, will be disappointed. That was a meek second half, the sort of roll-over job that they produced in finals last year. When things get tough, too much is left to too few and if the big forwards aren't being fed they struggle to hold ascendency. And without Mark Keane the backline seemed rudderless.
It's a big result for both clubs. Only one of these teams looked top-four calibre tonight.
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 10:13pm
Tim Membrey adds one for the road!
Hilarious. Shocking turnover coming out of defence results in three free Magpies witih within 20 metres of the goal.
Membrey boots the easiest goal of the night and incredibly, it's out to 40 points.
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 10:06pm
Beau McCreery! It's a Collingwood night!
Might be tempting to read too heavily into this second half from Collingwood... but sheesh, they have been seriously good here. They've looked quick and powerful, and have run all over the Crows here.
Forward pressure, turnover, handball, handball, snap, goal. So simple, impossible to stop tonight.
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 10:02pm
Ed Allan kicks another! Pies nearly home!
Ed Allan is having some sort of last quarter! The Pies are kicking away now and surely can't be caught.
It's just chaos and contest, but the Magpies have won in those areas all night. Allan sneaks a snap through congestion and it finds its way home.
The Crows fans are heading for the exits, some of them taking their absurd boos with them.
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 9:58pm
Ed Allan drills another Collingwood goal!
Just moments after hitting the post, Allan splits the middle witha burst of speed and a wonderful snap. Forward pressure and quick hands creating the chance for the in-form Allan.
That Adelaide backline, without Mark Keane, has been poor tonight.
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 9:56pm
Riley Thilthorpe responds for the Crows
And boy did they need it. Neal-Bullen came out the front of the centre square and laid out a delightful pass for the leading Thilthorpe.
Meanwhile Brayden Maynard has left the field and has headed straight down the race. He's limping on his left leg.
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 9:54pm
Tim Membrey extends the Collingwood lead further!
A nothing kick from De Goey, rushed across the face of his own goal, falls in the perfect spot for Membrey to mark. It might just be Collingwood's night.
Membrey goes back and kicks his first of the night to give Collingwood a 19-point lead. It's getting tough for the Crows now.
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 9:51pm
Nick Daicos! Of course it's Nick! Pies by 13!
Well, it's Nick Daicos, but it's also Dan Houston. The run-down tackle from Houston on Neal-Bullen was incredible, turning a potential counter-attack into a Daicos chance.
Daicos took the loose ball 65 from goal, weaved a path to 50 and the nailed his shot on the run. Just a simply phenomenal footballer.
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 9:49pm
First goal going to be huge here
We've knocked five minutes off the game clock and still the wait for a goal in the last term goes on. Collingwood owning field position and a seven-point lead, but it feels precarious.
First goal almost worth two.
Key Event
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 9:35pm
3QT: Collingwood 10.8 (68) leads Adelaide 9.6 (60)
A mighty impressive term from the Pies, who have managed to wrestle the game onto their own terms after it looked like they might get blown away early in the second quarter.
It's an eight-point Collingwood lead on the back of another big Nick Daicos game. He's got 29 touches and six clearances to 3QT, and was particularly damaging in that third term.
The Crows are obviously still right there and only a kick and a bit back. Most of the stats of note are incredibly tight, and in truth the difference in the game right now is a handful of freak goals the Pies have kicked. And yet, this is not a game Adelaide can afford to drop, so something will have to give in this critical last term.
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 9:33pm
Ben Keays gets an important one for the Crows
After a bit of volleyball back and forth, the ball spills to Keays at the tip of the goalsquare. He's able to squeeze his kick away and find a critical late goal.
There was some dispute as to whether the ball crossed the line, but it did not. Perhaps it should have, from a Collingwood perspective.
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 9:24pm
Jordan De Goey has a goal in game 200!
The Collingwood foot is being put down. They are controlling the game behind the play and dominating it up front. Nick Daicos is going nuts, they are winning every contest and the Crows are looking confused.
De Goey marked strongly and drilled his set shot from directly in front. They're building a lead now.
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 9:20pm
Angus Anderson with a freak Collingwood goal!
We have seen some stupid goals tonight, and that one might be the dumbest of the lot. What's he doing having a shot from there off a step? With people everywhere?
Anderson from deep, DEEP in the pocket just launched the ball skyward and let it drift its way back through. Incredible, Pies by eight.
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 9:18pm
Harvey Harrison snaps and the Pies are in front!
Collingwood in front! Who saw this coming halfway through the second?
They've turned it around in the contest up the ground and the forward line remains dangerous. West brought it to ground, Harrison worked the dribbler through to perfection. It's a two-point game in Collingwood's favour.
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 9:12pm
Steele Sidebottom steadies and goals for the Pies
They are just never out of this game. Collingwood's ability to find scores to stay in touch is incredible.
Sidebottom held his width on the fat side, and when the sloppy kick tumbled to a dangerous spot he hit the contest hardest and cleanest. He split the pack and snapped a ripper.
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 9:07pm
Josh Rachele gets the Crows going in the second half
The ball has largely lived in the Collingwood attacking end so far in this third quarter, but the Crows have managed to sting them on turnover the other way.
Rankine started it with a run down tackle and from there Adelaide were off. Rachele got on the end of the Walker kicked and nailed the set shot.