In short:
Popular Greens MP Tim Read has died at the age of 64, after a well-publicised battle with metastatic cancer.
The former GP used his final year as the Member for Brunswick to fight against the planned closure of VicHealth.
Dr Read has been remembered by political leaders as a kind, funny and decent man, who was respected across parliament.
Victorian Greens MP Tim Read has died aged 64, following a high-profile battle with metastatic cancer.
Dr Read, who announced his retirement from the Victorian parliament in January, used his final year as the Member for Brunswick to fight against the Allan government's decision to close VicHealth, described as the world's first health promotion foundation.
The former general practitioner told the ABC in January that VicHealth had helped pioneer sun safety messaging that could have helped him reduce his cancer risk if promoted when he was younger.
Paying tribute to Dr Read on social media today, Victorian Greens leader Ellen Sandell said the Brunswick MP was the most liked MP in the state parliament.
"Tim was a brilliant local MP, doctor and scientist - but to those who knew him, he was also the kindest, funniest and most fundamentally decent of people," Ms Sandell said.
"Tim never held back from speaking truth to power, whether it was getting arrested for spray-painting health messages on tobacco billboards prior to getting elected or taking it up to the Premier in Question Time.
"Yet, he was also the most liked MP in state parliament, respected across the community for that rarest combination in a politician: conviction, integrity, wit and genuine humility."
Ms Sandell said Dr Read's advocacy led to legislative reforms over pill testing, tobacco licensing, the abolition of public drunkenness laws and a statewide plan to eradicate congenital syphilis and HIV transmission.
She said his work also led to gay men being allowed to donate blood, and a statutory ban on solitary confinement in prisons.
Victorian Premier Ben Carroll said he spoke with Dr Read earlier this week and was "deeply touched by that conversation".
"We spoke about something on which we have always agreed: integrity in public life and the need for reform," Mr Carroll said.
"Despite his health challenges, he was positive and optimistic for a better world.
"I always valued his intelligent and humane contributions to the public debate."
Victorian Opposition Leader Jess Wilson said Dr Read "was a man of conviction and a thoroughly decent person".
"He brought sincerity, compassion and a strong sense of public duty to his work, earning respect across the parliament," she said.
"His commitment to integrity in public life was unwavering. Through his leadership of parliament's Integrity and Oversight Committee and his advocacy for stronger anti-corruption laws, Tim worked to ensure those entrusted with power were held accountable."
Ms Wilson said parliament often required negotiation and compromise.
"I always enjoyed working with Tim. He was an honest broker, someone who listened, engaged in good faith and approached every discussion with respect and integrity."
Born in 1962, Dr Read completed a PhD while working as a medical practitioner in a public HIV and sexual health clinic.
His research included HIV prevention and treatment and how best to treat antibiotic-resistant sexually transmitted infections.
Dr Read's political activism started in his early 20s, as a participant in the Billboard-Utilising Graffitists Against Unhealthy Promotions group, comically known as BUGA-UP.
The politician first ran for a parliamentary seat at a federal level, running as the Greens candidate at the 2013 election in former prime minister Bob Hawke's seat of Wills, which overlaps with the state electorate of Brunswick.
The following year, he stood as the Greens candidate for Brunswick in the Victorian election before ultimately winning the seat on his second attempt in 2018.
The Greens hold the inner suburban constituency with a two-candidate preferred margin of 13.7 per cent against Labor.
A by-election for the Brunswick electorate will not be necessary as Victoria is already scheduled to go to the polls on November 28.
Last year, Dr Read told the ABC he had noticed his leg was swollen while getting ready for work.
Scans revealed cancer had spread throughout his body. Dr Read first had a melanoma removed from his leg seven years ago.
His initial diagnosis was grim, forcing the Brunswick MP to retire ahead of the November state election.
In January, Dr Read said closing VicHealth would create a "false economy" - an apparent saving that would in fact lead to more spending.
"We need to be strengthening health promotion, not weakening it," he told the ABC.
VicHealth was set up in 1987 by Labor premier John Cain and his health minister David White with bipartisan political support.
The policy banned outdoor tobacco advertising and used taxes from cigarette sales to promote health, including warning about the dangers of cigarettes.
Revenue was used to fund the arts and sport, which until then had relied heavily on tobacco sponsorship.
In his valedictory speech, Dr Read called for stronger NSW-style anti-corruption oversight in Victoria and bolstered rental controls, similar to those of the Australian Capital Territory.
"Despite the theatrics, most of us are here for the right reasons," he said.
"Politicians are unfairly maligned, and for me, politics is the work you do to improve people's circumstances, not just now but in the future.
"Politics is hope in motion. We politicians might want our opponents to lose their seats, but we cannot help but feel some warmth towards those we work with."