Minns government rejects expansion of hate speech laws after review recommendations made public
Tue 4 Aug 2026 at 6:31pm
, updated
Wed 5 Aug 2026 at 5:45am
In short:
The Minns government has rejected a report's key recommendation to expand hate speech laws, citing "complex questions".
John Sackar KC was asked by the government to assess whether hate speech protections should be extended beyond race to other vulnerable groups.
Greens MP, Amanda Cohn, says marginalised groups are experiencing "worsening hatred and division", after "months of secrecy".
The Minns government has rejected key advice from a review it commissioned, which recommends hate speech laws be extended to protect more members of the community.
As a result, inciting hatred against people based on sexual orientation, disability, gender identity, religion and other characteristics will not be made illegal under the Crimes Act.
Inciting hatred based on race will remain a criminal offence.
For months, the government refused to release the review by former Supreme Court judge John Sackar KC, which was completed in November last year.
The government clashed with upper house MPs who were seeking to force the document's release, resulting in the parliamentary suspension of Labor frontbencher John Graham.
On Tuesday afternoon, the government released the review along with a statement rejecting its key recommendation.
"The NSW government has decided not to expand the existing criminal offence of inciting racial hatred to apply to additional protected attributes," Attorney-General Michael Daley said.
"The government's view is that expanding the racial hatred offence to cover other attributes raises complex questions about freedom of expression, freedom of religion, and the consistent application of the criminal law across the community."
Pressure to protect
It is already illegal to incite violence against someone based on characteristics like race, religion, sexual orientation, intersex status or HIV status.
But in 2025, following a spate of antisemitic incidents, the Minns government announced it would amend the Crimes Act, making it illegal to incite hatred as well.
This went against the NSW Law Reform Commission, which recommended against changing the existing laws.
But, Labor's new legislation only covered hate speech based on race, prompting some other vulnerable groups, including disability and LGBTIQA+ advocates, to argue for the same protections.
The government commissioned Mr Sackar to assess whether the hate speech protections should be extended to other vulnerable groups.
His report recommended greater uniformity between the groups protected against incitement to violence and those protected against incitement to hatred.
He said the inconsistency was "detrimental to social cohesion".
"Both offences ought to protect the same groups to prevent any perception of a 'hierarchical, two-tier model of protection',"
He also recommended that disability be added as a protected attribute, against incitement to both hatred and violence.
Other recommendations called for better reporting and education around hate-based conduct, as well as specialised training for police.
The government said it would "continue to consider" the remainder of the report.
However, Mr Daley said a NSW Law Reform Commission review into anti-discrimination laws would also help guide government policy, along with the recommendations of the royal commission into antisemitism.
"There is no place for hatred in New South Wales," Mr Daley said.
"Everyone deserves to feel safe, respected and free from intimidation, regardless of their background, faith, sexuality or identity."
Greens slam 'secrecy'
The Greens have accused the government of childish tactics in seeking to suppress the report.
Upper house MPs made repeated attempts to force the government to hand over the Sackar review, but Labor argued it was a cabinet document.
Greens MP, Amanda Cohn, said marginalised groups were experiencing "worsening hatred and division", after the government engaged in "months of secrecy".
"This report has been sitting on the government's desk since November last year," she said.
"More than half of its recommendations don't require legislative change.
"The Minns Labor government 'continuing to consider' the remaining recommendations after seven months is kicking the can down the road on critical matters of safety and inclusion."