In short:
A psychologist and shooting organisation official has told the antisemitism royal commission gun clubs should be trained to detect radicalisation warning signs.
The Royal Commission on Antisemitism and Social Cohesion also heard more public awareness is needed to help people recognise signs of violent extremism.
The inquiry has this week explored ways to stop people who may be on the path radicalisation.
Gun clubs must be better equipped to spot the signs of radicalisation in members who may risk committing violent acts, a shooting organisation official and psychologist says.
Witnesses before the Royal Commission on Antisemitism and Social Cohesion have this week painted a picture of the tools available to disrupt someone on the path to radicalisation.
Daniel Gregg works with people at various stages of radicalisation in his work as a psychologist in New South Wales, and is also the secretary of a shooting association.
He said gun clubs were uniquely positioned to intervene early in a person's path to radicalisation, and should be trained to detect the warning signs.
"If you taught clubs to notice those things and then refer those to the more appropriate pathways that we could be preventing further radicalisation," he said.
"We don't want bad actors in our organisations ... because we wear the collective consequences if something goes wrong.
"Clubs are often called to coronial inquests and the last thing I wanted to do was be called to a coronial inquest and I hadn't done enough."
People becoming radicalised in weeks, inquiry told
Mr Gregg said he had implemented a behavioural screening framework at his own gun club, which involved a prospective member being interviewed and assigned a mentor to guide them through club and legislative requirements for firearms owners.
Commissioner Virginia Bell AC SC put to Mr Gregg that further firearms restrictions may be needed as part of the response to the Bondi Beach terror attack.
"It may be that Australia would be better off if it had a more restrictive approach to people being able to obtain a licence to use, albeit at a sporting club, weapons of the kind that were used at Bondi," she said to him.
Mr Gregg said he disagreed.
"A lot of what I am seeing from those on extremist pathways is that people can come through because they are self-radicalising, they have no [criminal] background ... they have no markers that law enforcement would be able to pick up," he said.
"If you had more stricter pathways, you would still have people who would meet the requirements and get through, and they'd still be vulnerable to radicalisation."
In his work as a psychologist, Mr Gregg said he had previously observed people who were recruited by an extremist network typically became radicalised over a period of 12 to 18 months.
He said that shifted post-COVID, with people who self-radicalised becoming committed to an ideology in as little as two to four weeks.
Public awareness push for support helpline
The inquiry has also considered initiatives to help people spot the signs of radicalisation in their workmates, friends and family.
Through its website and helpline, Step Together directs people to resources about violent extremism, and general services which may offer support.
Countering violent extremism expert Michelle Grossman conducted a review of the program, which is run in NSW and delivered across the country.
Professor Grossman said Step Together played an important role in the countering violent extremism landscape, but not enough people knew about its existence.
"I actually think we need a saturation campaign around violent extremism in Australia," she said.
"Violent extremists do not arrive from another planet, they are not beamed down on a spaceship, they are ordinary people in families, in our workplaces and in our schools.
"If we do not have the public awareness to be able to recognise and take steps towards addressing harms on many levels, then I believe we are doing ourselves a national disservice."
Professor Grossman said such an awareness campaign must be widespread, instead of isolated to certain groups.
"I feel quite strongly that the softly, softly approach, that more refined targeted approach, I think we're past that point," she said.
"I think some of the tragic and horrific events that we've seen recently in Australia have really clarified that for me. I don't think that we can afford anymore to have that."
'Tunnel vision' for extremism
NSW Department of Communities and Justice director Heather Jackson said work was underway to raise the profile of Step Together.
She also discussed the role of the state's Engagement and Support program in helping people and families vulnerable to violent extremist influence.
Ms Jackson said the age of eligibility for the program had been lowered from 14 to 10 in recent years to respond to the growing demand for the service.
"Unfortunately, in the last few years the landscape was indicating that there were young people, children 10 years and above, that were indicating capacity, capability and willingness to undertake a violent extremist event," she said.
Ms Jackson said the program worked to foster a sense of connection and belonging in participants who had developed "tunnel vision" for ideologically motivated extremism.