Thu, 3 Sept, 8:10 pm, Final score, Dockers 40, Hawks 72
It was one of the greatest grand finals in history as the Brisbane Lions used "Wharfie Time" to their own advantage to claim their third flag in a row.
From a controversial call on the siren to an absolute sitter missed on the goal-line, these are the quick hits from a stunning grand final.
1. Neale booed from the moment he takes the field
If you weren't aware that Fremantle fans were none too pleased that Lachie Neale was playing in this grand final before the match, the Purple Haze left no doubt as their former favourite son ran onto the field.
Neale, who played for the Dockers in their only other grand final appearance in 2013, was controversially freed to play in this grand final after originally being handed a one-week ban for a gut punch on Jack Ginnivan in the prelim final.
Starting on the bench, Neale ran onto the field to a chorus of booing at the MCG as Dockers fans showed that they weren't fully on board with the "good bloke" provision that had allowed the dual Brownlow Medallist to play.
Later, Neale had a shot at goal as the 'G hummed with a long "boooo" that turned quickly to a joyous "ayyyy" as his shot flew wide.
2. Dockers controversially denied a shot on quarter time
With the seconds counting down to quarter time and the Lions leading by a point, the Dockers made a last-ditch attack that saw Neil Erasmus take a mark just outside 50.
Erasmus turned casually and laid a perfect little pass out in front of the leading Josh Treacy.
The problem was that it was just a little too little.
The umpire called play on for the kick not going 15 metres, Treacy was tackled, a ball up was called, and the quarter ended.
If Dockers fans hadn't had enough of the old boo for Neale, they were well rewarded with another opportunity to unleash on the umpire.
To the eye, it looked like it was a 15m kick, and commentators and spectators alike were blindsided by the call as it happened.
On replay, it was certainly close, but you'd want to be sure making that call in a grand final.
3. McKenna kicks another goal of the year
Goals kicked in the finals aren't considered for the goal of the year, but if they were, Conor McKenna might have won it.
I mean, he did win it for his regular-season pearler, but he probably would have won it again for this dribbler.
Down by five points early in the second quarter, the Sherrin spilled to a static McKenna who barely had enough space to get any leverage behind his boot.
But with what seemed like millimetres between his hand and his foot, McKenna managed to get the pill to his foot, dribbling it through to take the lead.
4. Dockers skipper crumples to the ground
Hearts were in mouths in the third quarter as Dockers skipper Alex Pearce crumpled to the ground while chasing the ball on the wing.
It wasn't a grab at a hamstring, or pull of a calf, or a twist of the knee, but a straight fall to the turf that signalled something pretty serious.
Carried from the ground, shots of Pearce on the bench later on would show a big bag of ice strapped to his Achilles.
It was day done, and it was a costly loss of a key defender that would come back to haunt Freo.
5. Young's double special
The Norm Smith Medal was up for grabs in the third quarter, and Dockers star Hayden Young figured he'd put his hand up for a shot at the title.
His first act was a very Hayden Young-like goal, streaking through the 50m arc on the run and launching long for a major.
His next was a goal that mimicked his stunner in the preliminary final against the Swans, but from the opposite pocket, curling a beauty around to give the Dockers the break.
6. Treacy misses an absolute sitter
With the Dockers on a burst and looking to put what felt like a game-winning break on the Lions, Josh Treacy got on the end of ball that spilled into his hands in the goal square.
The key forward was all but 2m from the goal as he looked to launch a big hoof into the Sherrin and send it into the third tier.
But as he did, Lions defender Ryan Lester just got a hand to Treacy's bottom, ever so slightly putting him off balance, with the kick somehow flying wide.
Not hitting the post flush, not even scraping the side - just completely missing.
While Patrick Voss would go on to kick a goal not long after and get the break anyway, it was an incredible blunder at a crucial moment.
7. Where's Wharfie Time?
Whenever Wharfie Time isn't in the room, people should be asking "where's Wharfie Time?"
And that was the case as Fremantle made their break, with commentators questioning why the Dockers hadn't pushed the button yet for the iconic tolling of the bells.
Well, they did after the Voss goal - and it might go down in history as the "Wharfie Curse" for what happened next.
8. Charlie and Zac snap absolute rippers
Lions football manager Danny Daly told the ABC Sport broadcast team before the game that coach Chris Fagan had played "Wharfie Time" to his players in their Friday team meeting.
But the Lions players after the game revealed just how much that session had impacted them, saying they were told to use it to energise them if they were feeling flat.
With the Dockers up by 17 and the bells still ringing in Lions' ears, the pill hammered forward twice in the blink of an eye, the first attack finishing in a Charlie Cameron snap, the next in a Zac Bailey goal.
The Lions were in touch.
9. Morris grabs an absolute ripper
And in mere moments, the Lions had the lead.
This time it was Logan Morris clunking a big grab in the forward 50, directly in front.
Morris converted.
Fremantle hearts broke.
And the Brisbane Lions became just the second team in VFL/AFL history to claim two three-peat victories, doing so in one of the greatest grand finals you're ever likely to see.