A tradie standing in a front yard with kids. A university student asleep in his bed.
Neither had links to organised crime. Both ended up dead.
Their murders are the latest loss of life in Sydney's sprawling gang war, where innocent people are increasingly being targeted, mistaken for someone else, or murdered because of who they are related to.
Police blame inept teenagers being contracted by overseas criminals, who are willing to murder for a few thousand dollars.
Authorities say eight people have been killed in cases of mistaken identity since 2021.
Count those allegedly targeted because they are family members of gang members, or were innocent bystanders, and that figure climbs to 14.
Here are the stories of the innocent victims caught in the crossfire.
Joshua Macdonald, September 2026
It was mid-afternoon and Joshua Macdonald had parked his work van in the driveway of a Merrylands West home.
He, another man and two children were in the front yard.
A stolen grey Audi appeared, and two gunmen fired a volley of shots, killing Mr Macdonald.
The Central Coast tradie, who co-owns an electrical business, celebrated his 40th birthday last week.
"He was a very beautiful man with his whole life ahead of him and that has been taken away," his Aunt Darlene told the ABC.
"He was so loved and I am very proud of what he achieved in his very short life."
Police believe the intended target, who allegedly had links to the notorious Alameddine crime network, was associated with the property but did not live there.
The ABC has obtained CCTV which captures the sound of the gunshots and the car speeding down the street.
Marco Tapia, September 2026
Biomedical engineering student Marco Tapia was asleep in his bed when masked intruders broke in and shot him dead.
His parents were also at the Glen Alpine family home when the balaclava-clad gunmen entered.
The 23-year-old was in his third year of a degree at the University of Technology Sydney, was a volunteer youth leader and trained in martial arts.
After the shooting, 'Coconut Cartel' gang figure Iziah Utai shared a social media post saying the offenders had "popped the wrong person didn't even get the right house".
Police believe a feud between the self-proclaimed Coconut Cartel, which takes its name from a historic slur against Pasifika people, and rival Alameddines is fuelling the violence.
Iziah Utai is hiding overseas after attempts on his life, and that of his innocent father ex-NRL player Matt Utai, who narrowly survived a drive-by shooting in February.
Chris Baghsarian, February 2026
Eighty-five-year-old grandfather Chris Baghsarian was kidnapped from his North Ryde home in February and taken to a Dural "stronghold" according to police.
After an 11-day search, his remains were found near a golf course in Pitt Town in Sydney's north-west.
Police believe a relative of Sydney businessman Dimitri Stepanyan was the intended target, and Mr Baghsarian was taken by mistake.
A dozen people have been charged over his death, including a 19-year-old.
Gilbert Shino, August 2025
39-year-old Gilbert Shino was walking with a friend, who allegedly had links to an Assyrian crime gang, when he was gunned down outside a busy Sydney pub in front of patrons.
The two men were heading back to their car after watching an Ultimate Fighting Championship event at the inner west pub when the hitmen opened fire from a Ford Mustang.
Mr Shino died. His friend, Maradona Yalda, survived. Police believed Mr Yalda was the intended target.
A female pub worker said she heard a bullet "whiz" past her, and patrons told the ABC the saw a "little flash" from the gun and threw themselves on the floor.
Luke Manassa, June 2025
Luke Manassa, a 21-year-old university student, was stabbed while visiting the home of someone "well known" to authorities.
Police say he was attacked by men wielding machetes, in a horrific case of mistaken identity.
Police allege the two masked men 'lay in wait' ahead of the attack, which was described as "very, very amateurish".
Three teenagers, a 16-year-old and two 17-year-olds, have been charged over the attack.
Police allege the contract was for someone else, and Mr Manassa was targeted by mistake.
Mr Manassa was well-loved figure in the local Christian-Lebanese community, studying at university and working in his family's construction business.
John Versace, May 2025
John Versace, a 23-year-old tradie, was killed in front of his parents in the driveway of their Condell Park home in 2025. The hitmen had targeted the wrong home.
Mr Versace pulled up in his ute before being fired at 10 times, in what police described as a "brutal and execution-style killing".
In video taken in the aftermath of the shooting, Mr Versace's family could be heard pleading: "Who would do this?"
"There is nothing to suggest Mr Versace was anything but a hardworking young man who was living at home with his family and trying to set himself up for the rest of his life," Superintendent Jason Box said following the shooting.
Mr Versace's death was one of several that led to the formation of Taskforce Falcon, a new police unit set up to investigate a string of shootings in Sydney, being run by Superintendent Box.
Three men have been charged over the murder, one aged 19.
Thi Kim Tran, April 2025
Bankstown mother Thi Kim Tran was abducted at gunpoint in front of her child, stripped naked, shot dead, her body later found inside a burnt-out car in a nearby suburb.
Police alleged Ms Tran's husband had fallen foul of a Victorian-based Vietnamese drug syndicate who accused him of stealing drugs.
A "contracted kill crew" had attempted to lure the husband out by sending him photo of his kidnapped wife, but when he could not be contacted, they killed her, Homicide Squad Commander Superintendent Joseph Doueihi alleged at the time.
An eight-year-old boy in the home was hit with a baseball bat during the kidnapping and had to be treated in hospital.
Nine people have been charged and are before the courts, the youngest aged 20.
Kim Duncan, April 2025
Kim Duncan, 65, was visiting her son at his Ambarvale home in Sydney's south-west when she was shot in the leg during a drive-by shooting.
The passionate Penrith Panthers supporter had recently moved from Tamworth to Sydney to be closer to family.
Police said the grandmother had been caught in the crossfire of a "beef" with a person who lived at the home.
Ms Duncan's daughter Cassandra Dowd told the ABC said she will "never get over" the loss of her mother.
"She was our mum. She was happy, she was loving, she was definitely an innocent in all of this,"
Three people have been charged over Ms Duncan's death, including a 19-year-old.
Bol Deng, February 2024
Twenty-year-old Bol Deng was killed during a peak hour drive-by shooting in Fairfield Heights. Mr Deng was simply standing outside his home; his family nearby.
The hit was targeted, but not because of his criminal connections.
Police alleged the hit on Deng was an act of retribution, after his brother was named as the alleged gunman in the assassination of underworld kingpin Alen Moradian in a Bondi carpark in 2023.
A 25-year-old has been charged over his alleged role in the contract killing.
Ahmad Al-Azzam, July 2023
25-year-old Ahmad Al-Azzam died in hospital after being shot while sitting alone in his car in Greenacre.
Police alleged the hitmen mistook Mr Al-Azzam for a member of a rival network, thought to be the Comanchero bikie gang.
The men in the stolen vehicle also shot a 22-year-old man and 19-year-old woman who were sitting in a nearby car. Police allege the innocent members of the public had caught the attention of the shooter when their brake lights lit up. They survived.
"It's one of the most callous crimes that I've seen in my 28 years in regard to investigating organised crime," Detective Chief Superintendent Jason Weinstein said following the attack.
Eight people have been charged; the youngest alleged offender aged 21.
Taha Sabbagh, March 2023
Forty-year-old Taha Sabbagh was driving his young son to a boxing lesson at Elite Fight Force gym in Sefton when a masked man shot him multiple times through his windscreen and car door.
"It's horrendous to think a 12-year-old had to witness his father being shot dead in this manner," Homicide Squad Detective Superintendent Danny Doherty said at the time.
Court documents stated Taha was "seated in the driver's seat of his car and the child watched helplessly from the carpark, screaming".
A 26-year-old man was later sentenced to a non-parole period of 12 years over the murder.
Court documents reveal police prosecutors thought the intended target was probably the gym owner, who drove a similar car to Mr Sabbagh, as they could find "no known motivation" for the Sydney father's murder.
"His brother gave evidence of his devoted and quiet family life, prosocial connections and stable employment," court documents read.
Amy al-Hazouri, August 2022
Hairdresser Amy al-Hazouri was sitting in the backseat of a car in Panania with a client when at least a dozen bullets were fired into their vehicle.
Both the 39-year-old and her client Lametta Fadlallah were killed in what police believe was a targeted shooting of Ms Fadlallah who was a former partner of an underworld figure.
Ms al-Hazouri had recently become engaged, and her family had been planning to travel to Australia from Lebanon to celebrate.
NSW Police homicide squad boss Danny Doherty described the shooting as "unprecedented" and said it broke an unwritten rule of not targeting women and family.
Toufik Hamze, October 2021
Toufik Hamze, 64, was gunned down while getting into a red ute outside his Guildford home. His son, the likely target given his criminal connections, was also killed.
Their deaths came at the height of tit-for-tat shootings between the rival Hamzy and Alameddine clans over the city's drug trade.
A 16-year-old boy was among those charged. The teenager later pleaded guilty to being an accessory after the fact and was handed a two-year intensive corrections order.
Mustapha Naaman, January 2021
Police said 29-year-old Mustapha Naaman had simply been in the wrong place at the wrong time.
He and his 23-year-old friend were driving a car identical to the intended target - a white Mercedes.
Police said the hit had been intended for two members of the Hamze crime family, who had left a boxing event in Hurstville moments earlier.
Instead, the gunmen killed Mr Naaman and seriously injured his friend.
"This is out of control," NSW Opposition Leader Kellie Sloane said on Wednesday, calling for further action to be taken to protect the public.
Superintendent Jason Box denied NSW Police had lost control.
"There's been 800 arrests for persons associated with criminal activity and organised crime networks," he told the ABC.
Superintendent Box heads Taskforce Falcon, a specialist unit created to target organised crime gang violence and public shootings in Sydney.
A "high percentage" were juveniles lured in by contracts offered by gangland figures who had fled overseas, he said.
"There's been a massive uptake of juveniles committing these offences at the request of someone else ... It's the attraction of money that is being thrown around," Superintendent Box said.
"They're reckless and they're getting it wrong and there's these horrific murders that have happened."