In short:
Nine boys are facing a total of 70 charges after a string of vehicle thefts in WA's Kimberley.
Derby Police say seven cars were stolen from multiple properties across the town in the early hours of August 7.
What's next?
Seven boys will face the Derby, Broome and Perth Children's Court at various dates across August, while two others were issued juvenile cautions.
Police have charged nine boys with a combined 70 offences over a string of vehicle thefts in Western Australia's far north.
Police allege the boys trespassed several houses across Derby, 2,200 kilometres north of Perth, between 1am and 4:30am on Friday last week.
The boys allegedly stole a tray-top ute, a Toyota LandCruiser, a quad bike and four motorcycles over the course of the morning.
The group were arrested and all vehicles recovered and returned to the owners.
There were no reports of injuries.
The 70 charges include several counts of stealing and attempting to steal a motor vehicle, as well as trespassing.
Seven of the boys are due to face the Derby, Broome and Perth Children's courts at various dates this month, while two teenagers were issued with cautions.
'Resilient community' under pressure
Derby Police officer-in-charge Nathan Smith said the group had allegedly been the driving force behind a recent spike in offending around the town.
"Every sub-district has certainly bubbles where there's increases in crime and this is just one that's happened in Derby," Senior Sergeant Smith said.
"For the most part, we're a resilient community that has been subject to an increase off the basis of a young group that were like-minded in their attitude on the night."
He said the close-knit nature of Derby's community, including residents looking out for each other and being mindful of suspicious behaviour, had played a key role in resolving the incident.
"It's a safe place to live, it's a safe place to come and visit and travel through," Senior Sergeant Smith said.
"We take this very seriously."
Community solutions
Youth crime in the Kimberley has been in the spotlight across the past week, after a viral video of a separate alleged car theft in Kununurra.
A long-awaited on-country youth facility in the Kimberley welcomed its first cohort of young men earlier this year.
The Wala Kooral-bi Centre, 120km south of Derby, offers an on-country diversion program for boys aged 14 to 17.
Eight teenagers have been housed at the facility since May, with the Marlamanu Project offering an alternative to sending juveniles south to Perth's controversy-plagued Banksia Hill Detention Centre.
"Those community led solutions are the ones that increase our ability to distract and prevent this cohort from continuing this behaviour," Senior Sergeant Smith said.
"We're really supportive of Marlumanu and the work they are doing.
"We want to make sure that's a program that continues to operate because I think it's a needs basis in community."
'Community safety a priority'
Shire of Derby-West Kimberley chief executive Tamara Clarkson said the incident was a disappointing one for the town.
"Community safety is obviously a priority of the shire, but it is a police matter," she said.
"Always ensure that you are locking vehicles, your windows and doors, hiding keys never leaving them available."
Ms Clarkson urged people to report anything concerning to police.
"This is definitely a rarity for Derby," Ms Clarkson said.
"We've worked hard with our community to ensure that safety in priority."