In short:
The husband of a former childcare worker has avoided an immediate jail term for possessing and distributing child exploitation material.
Ronald Houghton was arrested and charged after an online sting operation saw him brag about abusing children in an online chat with undercover police officers disguised as predators.
What's next?
Houghton was handed a 12-month suspended jail term with the judge citing his early guilty plea and traumatic childhood as mitigating factors.
A West Australian man who described children as "toys" and shared graphic video of a child performing a sexual act has avoided an immediate jail term.
Ronald Houghton was exposed and arrested after an online sting operation in 2025, making the claims and sharing the video in an online chat with WA Police investigators posing as fellow predators.
The 59-year-old was living in Ravensthorpe, 550 kilometres south-east of Perth, at the time of his arrest, and eventually pleaded guilty to producing and distributing child exploitation material.
He appeared in the Albany District Court for sentencing today, with District Court Judge Martin Flynn handing him a suspended 12-month jail term.
Judge Flynn took into account several mitigating factors in sentencing Houghton, including his traumatic and unhappy life that was characterised by isolation, trauma and unhappiness.
Houghton's early guilty plea also saw him receive a 20 per cent discount on his sentence.
He wore a red covering to hide his face as he left Albany Courthouse.
Undercover op
The court heard that in messages exchanged with the undercover officers, Houghton bragged about touching the children of former partners.
The messages saw him refer to children as "toys" and included the graphic exploitation video.
But the court heard that during a subsequent interview with police, Houghton said his actions were the result of "sheer boredom" and that he did not know he was committing an offence at the time.
Houghton's defence counsel denied he had a sexual interest in children, telling the court the 59-year-old was sexually abused as a child, and using the chatroom to meet paedophiles so he could confront them in person.
Jail term avoided
Prosecutor Asha Healy pushed for an immediate term of imprisonment, telling the court Houghton's offending represented a pattern and that he "continues to be a risk to the community".
But Judge Flynn said Houghton had no prior convictions of this manner and had shown sufficient remorse.
"I accept that you know that you have done the wrong thing," he said.
Houghton will have to attend counselling, participate in rehabilitation programs and regularly report to authorities as part of his release.
He will avoid imprisonment if he abides by those requirements and does not reoffend over the next 12 months.
Childcare connection
Houghton's wife of 26 years was assistant operations manager at Regional Early Education and Development (REED) at the time of his arrest, sparking concern among parents in Hopetoun and Ravensthorpe.
The court heard the woman no longer works so that she can take care of him full-time.
There is no suggestion that any of Houghton's offending either took place at, or involved children from, any of the childcare centres.
The ABC has contacted REED for comment in the wake of Houghton's sentencing.
At the time of his arrest, a REED spokesperson said it had "zero tolerance" for any action within or outside the organisation that compromised child safety.
'Wake-up call' for small town
Hopetoun residents had a mixed response when news of Houghton's sentencing broke on Monday.
Tabitha Franke has lived in the town for 10 years, and took her son out of daycare after Houghton was arrested.
"Honestly, the whole thing's disgusting," she said.
"Our kids should feel safe, especially in a small-town community where we thought they would feel safe."
Fellow resident Chelsea Byrne has been a childcare worker for almost two decades, and formerly worked at REED.
"When I've been going through pre-employment checks, the question has never been asked: 'Do you reside with someone who has committed crimes against children?'" she said.
She said the case had been a "rude wake-up call" for the community, with many parents scared off childcare altogether.