In short:
Hundreds of people marched through central Perth to protest Australia's biggest land defence expo.
The protests chanted anti-war slogans and criticised the Land Forces event, as a heavy police presence watched on.
The peaceful demonstrations contrast with the violent protests the same event was met with in Melbourne two years ago.
More than 600 people have marched through Perth city to peacefully protest Australia's biggest land defence expo, which opened in the state capital today two years after violent clashes marred demonstrations against the same event in Melbourne.
Chanting anti-war slogans, protesters against the Land Forces event held various placards and signs that read "there is no future in war" and "warmongers not welcome".
The planned protest, held by 35 organisations, began in Yagan Square before marching to Elizabeth Quay, which is near where the expo is being held at the Perth Convention and Exhibition Centre.
The demonstration was surrounded by a heavy police presence, with vans and other vehicles on stand-by.
At the start of the march, Noongar elders held a traditional smoking ceremony, which was followed by a group of dancers performing a flash mob to Edwin Starr's famous anti-war anthem "War".
'Choose peace'
Several Palestinian flags were held aloft, as well as signs criticising the military industry that included "Guns=Death" and "End arms trade with Israel".
"I think the world's at a crossroads. We've got to choose between peace and we've got to choose between war," said one protester, Paddy Cullen.
"Just think of what 11 million dollars could have been put towards in the middle of a cost-of-living crisis," said demonstrator Danica Scott, referring to the extra $11.5 million given to police to provide security for the expo.
Climate protester Will Shanahan, who is on the excluded persons list, said they attended the protest to highlight the overlap between military activity and environmental damage.
"The military is so destructive of the environment," they said.
Extra powers
The biennial Land Forces conference, featuring industry representatives from 60 countries, is being held between October 6 and 8 at Perth's Convention and Exhibition Centre, featuring almost 1,000 exhibiting organisations.
WA police were given 10 days of temporary extra powers for the event, which included the ability to ban "excluded persons" from the expo and its dedicated security zone outside the convention centre.
A new facial recognition system currently being trialled by WA police will likely be used to help enforce those bans.
In the lead-up to Land Forces, police deemed Greens staffer Matilda Lane-Rose an excluded person, but she was now permitted to enter the event's area for a "short window" on Tuesday to film content, after she lodged a complaint in the Supreme Court.
Police Minister Reece Whitby has described the police response as the "biggest police operation" in the state.
When the expo was held in Melbourne in 2024, there were ugly scenes as protesters clashed with police.
Hundreds of officers were called in and 24 police members were injured, while dozens of protesters were arrested in Victoria's capital, where officers arrested people for offences like assault, obscuring or hindering police, arson and blocking roadways.