Newcastle Knights hooker Phoenix Crossland has been suspended for four games by the NRL judiciary for the tackle that left Penrith's Nathan Cleary with a broken leg.
Crossland pleaded guilty to the dangerous contact charge on Tuesday before fronting the judiciary to learn his fate.
He will now miss this Sunday's NRL grand final.
The ban would also rule him out of New Zealand's three World Cup pool games.
Crossland was sent off for a hip drop tackle on Cleary in the 36th minute of Newcastle's preliminary final win over the Panthers.
Cleary suffered a compound fracture and a dislocated ankle.
Crossland was represented by barrister James McLeod, who made the case for his client to receive a two or three-week ban.
Crossland cited his career record, telling the judiciary he had never before been sent off. He admitted he got the execution of the tackle wrong but insisted "wasn't trying to hurt anyone".
Arguing for a four-game suspension, the NRL said Crossland's tackle failed to exercise a proper duty of care and, while accidental, did not show enough caution towards Cleary.
Crossland told the judiciary was deeply remorseful for Cleary's injury and had reached out to the Panthers star.
"I called him yesterday. It was obviously a tough phone call," Crossland said.
"I reached out to his dad [Panthers coach Ivan Cleary] as well.
"Nathan was great, he said not to worry about and he understood it was an accident.
"He was such a gentlemen, he told me to stop saying sorry.
"He's my favourite player in the game by a mile. He's the best player in the game and I look up to him."
Crossland described the incident and fallout as a low point in his life. In his submissions, McLeod produced abusive Instagram messages that had been directed towards Crossland in the past 48 hours.
"It's killing me, it's been the worst couple of days of my life," Crossland said.
"It's meant to be the best week of my life and it's been far from it."
The verdict sets up a scenario where 19-year-old Knight Diesel Hagan could make his NRL debut in a grand final.
It would be the first time such a debut has taken place in 90 years. Eddie Lockhart was the last to do it in 1936, for Balmain.
Harrison Graham will almost certainly shift to a starting role for Newcastle in the grand final, while other options for the Knights include Thomas Cant and Jermaine McEwen.
The ABC of SPORT
Sports content to make you think... or allow you not to. A newsletter delivered each Saturday.