In short:
The North Queensland Cowboys are proposing to build a leagues club for their supporters in Logan, south of Brisbane.
Logan Mayor Jon Raven said the project, which would include 100 gaming machines, would drain money from the region.
What's next?
Community consultation on the project closes in September.
North Queensland Cowboys are proposing to build a leagues club south of Brisbane but the Logan City Mayor warns the club "can't pick our pocket".
The project, which is in its preliminary stages, would see 100 gaming machines built in Holmview, Logan.
It is part of the Cowboys' plan to expand their reach to support junior and senior local rugby league across the state.
Logan City Mayor Jon Raven said he only found out about the plans for 100 machines a few weeks ago when the Liquor and Gaming Office wrote to the council.
"We'd never heard from the Cowboys until they put in this pokie palace application," he said.
"I would have thought, if you were going to try and take money out of Logan, come and talk to the community first."
Mr Raven said the area wouldn't be able to handle 100 poker machines.
"All of the other pubs that have pokies machines in that area have less than half the number of machines that the Cowboys are proposing to land in Logan," he said.
In the community impact statement, the club said it would provide local sponsorships, donations and support to sport and community of $1,650,000 over the first five years, commencing from $100,000 in the first year of operation.
"That's just not good enough," Mr Raven said.
"When you think about how far away Townsville is from Logan, Parramatta is closer to Logan than Townsville.
"They are so far out of catchment," he said.
Large support base
Cowboys Group Chief Executive Tim Follett said there was a significant and passionate support base in the state's south east with the region home to one of their largest supporter communities outside North Queensland.
"For many years we've heard from members and fans who would love a place they can call their own," he said.
In the community impact statement, it said 59 current financial members lived in the local community area but noted there "would most likely" be more supporters there.
Mr Follett said the Cowboys were committed to engaging openly and collaboratively with key stakeholders at appropriate times during the planning process.
"As part of our early consultation, we have reached out to the mayor's office to commence discussions and understand how we can work constructively with Logan City Council throughout the process."
Mr Follett said any future venue would be developed with a strong focus on community connection and local impact.
He said should the project progress, the venue would contribute to local employment, support community initiatives and build partnerships with grassroots sporting organisations and charities across the region.
"While this opportunity remains in its early stages, we believe there is potential to create a venue that brings Cowboys supporters together, whilst also delivering meaningful benefits for the local community," Mr Follett said.
Queensland Sport Minister Tim Mander said the Office of Liquor and Gaming Regulation Commission was looking into the issue.
When asked if he thought it would be beneficial for the venue to be in the state's south east, Mr Mander said he didn't know the area well enough.
"Let's just let the process take place and let's make sure that the public get their right to say something as well," he said.
'Big decision' for Logan
Shadow Treasurer Shannon Fentiman said she encouraged local community members to have their say on the proposal before she said, "anything about that".
"This is a big decision for Logan City, and I want locals to have their say," the Waterford MP said.
Mr Raven said the venue's approval was up to the Liquor and Gaming Office.
"They have overturned or reduced licences before," he said.
"We'd love to see them either reduce the number of licences for machines significantly or increase the amount of return to the community," he said.
But Mr Raven said Logan was open to having their own NRL team.
"If the Cowboys aren't sustainable in North Queensland... the Logan Cowboys sounds like a pretty good name for our new team," he said.
Community consultation on the proposed project closes in September.