WARNING: This story contains details some readers may find distressing, including descriptions of alleged sexual assault.
Graphic photographs of injuries allegedly inflicted by an internationally renowned YouTube star on an infatuated fan in his hotel room after a concert have been shown to a jury at his sexual assault trial in a Perth court.
Andres Felipe Valencia Barrientos, known to his millions of fans as Yung Filly, is on trial in the Perth District Court, accused of the brutal rape and assault of a 20-year-old woman at the Intercontinental Hotel in Perth's CBD in September 2024.
The 30-year-old rapper had been in Perth performing at Bar1, a waterfront venue in Perth's northern suburbs, and after the show had taken the young woman back to his hotel.
The pair had consensual sex in his room at the Intercontinental, before he allegedly violently raped her and repeatedly assaulted her, including biting and slapping her on the face, neck and breasts, strangling her, spitting in her mouth and forcing her to perform oral sex.
Mr Barrientos denies all the charges against him, which include sexual penetration without consent, impeding a person's breathing and assault.
Today the court heard evidence from sexual assault specialist Geraldine Hoy, who examined the young woman at the Sexual Assault Resource Centre two days after her alleged ordeal.
Multiple bruises
Dr Hoy took a series of close-up photographs of the 20-year-old's face, neck and breasts that were shown to the jury, depicting multiple large bruises and swellings.
The 21 photos included what Dr Hoy described as a "green purply" bruise on her neck, a linear bruise on her neck and a "large ... yellow bruise just above the right areola area of the breast".
Nearby on the same breast was another bruise measuring 4 centimetres x 8 centimetres, as well as a bruise that Dr Hoy described as yellow in colour.
Describing the photos in detail as they were displayed in court, Dr Hoy said the bruises on her face included two linear red swollen bruises on her right cheek, and bruising on the left side of her face that extended to her neck.
Dr Hoy said some of the bruising and swelling on the left side of the 20-year-old's neck could have been caused by obstructing the jugular vein, a form of strangulation.
Earlier the trial heard the 20-year-old woman had a "celebrity crush" on Mr Barrientos and had spoken of him as "her future husband".
She had worn her "lucky" white top to the gig in the hope of gaining access to the VIP area of the venue to get close to him, the court heard, which she was ultimately able to do late in the evening, before leaving with the rapper and his entourage in a van, back to his hotel.
The trial continues.