In short:
The state government has approved rules restricting where new adult entertainment services can operate in the Adelaide CBD.
This includes prominent areas in the CBD and all of North Adelaide, but does not include Hindley Street.
What's next?
The restrictions will come into effect immediately.
Planning rules restricting where new adult entertainment venues and shops can operate in Adelaide's CBD and North Adelaide have been approved by the state government.
The identified exclusion zones include prominent areas including King William Street, Rundle Mall, Rundle Street, North, South, East and West Terrace, as well as large parts of residential areas in the CBD's south and all of North Adelaide.
The rules apply to entertainment venues selling services like nude or lap dances and places selling sexually explicit materials and products, with entertainment precinct Hindley Street not included in the new exclusion zone.
Existing venues in the exclusion zones will not be impacted by the new rules, and do not apply to lingerie businesses and massage parlours, which the latter fell under a separate section of legislation.
"Massage parlours are managed under a different section of the code under personal services and there's a set of rules around them," Planning Minister Nick Champion said.
Mr Champion said these new changes would protect certain areas of the CBD from "what might be collectively known as strip joints and sex shops".
"What we want in Adelaide is to have our boulevards and our squares and the important areas of our city, like Rundle Street, which have particular characters, not just for the city but for the parklands," Mr Champion said.
"These should be the places people want to live and visit and frequent and we want them to have a particular civic character, a strong civic character.
"And that's what this piece of work by the City of Adelaide does and one of the reasons why we were happy to see it initiated into the planning and design code and now today formally adopted."
Changes to initial proposal
As part of the changes, sex shops will face closer scrutiny with Adelaide City Council who will be required to assess factors like advertising and shop presentation.
The Adelaide City Council said it "sought to correct growing concerns about the lack of suitable policies to guide assessment of such premises."
"But what it highlighted was that there was a risk here and we didn't want to risk all of the work that had been done in the East End by literally generations of South Australians," Mr Champion said.
"So that it could all be wrecked by one bad application or one bad proposal, so that led to the code amendment."
President of the East End Co-ordination Group and business owner Frank Hannon-Tan said the new restrictions would help protect the growing precinct.
"East End has developed into one of Adelaide's most successful dining, retail and cultural precincts," Mr Hannon-Tan said.
"It's planning rules like this that help protect the character that has made the East End successful.
"As more and more people move into the city, we want to give them certainty that the areas that they're moving into align with their expectation and continue to in the future."
When questioned about Hindley Street, Mr Champion said the street had always had a particular character.
"You know, for my entire lifetime, Hindley Street had that element to it needs to be carefully managed and one of the things about this particular code amendment is it gives the city of Adelaide an ability to better manage that interface with the street," he said.
"No-one's making moral judgements about it, you know we live in a free society, and people are free to make their own choices."