In short:
Shark capture gear set up off Perth's Sorrento Beach in a bid to catch the shark that killed swimmer Greg O'Neill on Friday has been removed after "no evidence of shark activity".
The chances of finding the shark were slim to none and more money should be invested in shark-spotting drones, according to one expert.
What's next?
Beaches from Marmion to Iluka in Perth's north, an almost 12-kilometre stretch of coastline, are set to reopen this morning after being closed in response to the fatal attack.
A behavioural biologist and shark drone expert has criticised the WA government's response to the state's most recent fatal shark attack, saying the chances of finding the shark responsible for a 63-year-old swimmer's death were slim to none.
WA Fisheries Minister Jackie Jarvis on Saturday took an "extraordinary" step of issuing a catch-and-kill order for the shark that killed Greg James O'Neill at Sorrento Beach in Perth's north.
Ms Jarvis said the decision was made under "the exceptional circumstances of the attack" where "the hazard posed by the shark" and "the potential recovery of coronial evidence" were taken into consideration.
Shark capture gear, a type of drum line normally used to tag sharks, was set up about 1.5 kilometres off the beach by the Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD).
The gear was removed yesterday afternoon, with DPIRD saying with "no evidence of shark activity" and "a significantly diminished chance" of catching the shark, the operation would not continue.
Culum Brown, from Macquarie University's Ecology and Evolution of Fishes Laboratory, said the chances of finding the shark responsible for Mr O'Neill's death were like finding "a needle in a haystack".
"The reality is that white sharks move a long, long way, they are literally on the move all the time ... by now, that shark could be hundreds of kilometres away,"
The only way to determine whether a shark is responsible, according to Mr Brown, is to kill and gut it to see if it has human remains in it.
"So what are they going to do? Catch every white shark on the west coast until they find the one? I mean, it's a bit ridiculous," he said.
Drones 'highly effective'
Mr Brown said he believed a better response would be to invest more funds in shark-spotting drones, an approach the New South Wales government took after a shark attack at Sydney's Coogee Beach in June.
"They [drones] are just a very highly effective technology," he said.
"They are a lot cheaper than fixed-wing or helicopters ... and one of the many benefits is that you can intervene before the shark attacks anybody and ... there's no bycatch as there is with shark nets and things like that."
He said that it was a "win-win" situation for swimmers and sharks.
Ms Jarvis added that deploying more drones to spot sharks along WA's vast coastline was "absolutely under consideration".
She said the government would first review its current mitigation strategies - which focus on tagging and tracking, an app for notifications, warning sirens, shark enclosures and personal deterrents - to see what more could be done to protect beachgoers.
Beaches set to reopen
Mr O'Neill was swimming close to the Sorrento Beach shoreline when a suspected three-metre great white took him on Friday morning.
Authorities soon began a wide-scale search for his body and the shark, which they believed they had located before losing track of it.
Beaches along almost 12 kilometres of coastline, from Marmion to Iluka, were closed as authorities searched for the 63-year-old's body, but they are set to reopen at 10am today.
Mr O'Neill's body is yet to be recovered.
WA Deputy Premier Rita Saffioti said yesterday she "100 per cent" supported Ms Jarvis's response to the attack, including the catch-and-kill order.
"The minister made a decision based on advice. That advice was given by, as I understand, both police and fisheries," Ms Saffiotti said.
WA Greens healthy oceans spokeswoman Sophie McNeill earlier criticised the order, describing it as cruel and ineffective.
Ms McNeill instead called for more funding for shark-spotting drones and helicopters, and an expansion of the shark tagging program.