In short:
A number of sponsors have suspended activities with the Sydney Swans amid a police investigation into an alleged incident in Melbourne.
Other associated brands have issued statements in response to the matter but maintained support for the club.
The club has issued an apology for the "distress" caused to the "wider community" and the impact on commercial partners and other parties.
A number of brands associated with the Sydney Swans have suspended their activities with the club in the wake of a police investigation into an alleged sexual assault in Melbourne on Monday.
Five Swans players, Isaac Heeney, Chad Warner, Nick Blakey, Riley Bice and James Jordon are linked to the police investigation.
The players are yet to be formally interviewed or charged and it is not suggested that any of them are being accused of sexual assault.
Sponsors Colgate, Volkswagen and Telsta have confirmed to the ABC that they have "suspended" or "paused" their activities with the players involved.
Other sponsors, including QBE and realestate.com.au, have released statements condemning any abuse or violence against women but have stopped short of withdrawing their support for the club.
Swans chairman Andrew Pridham and chief executive Matthew Pavlich expressed a "sincere apology for the distress this incident has caused the wider community," in a statement released on Wednesday afternoon, naming "members, supporters, commercial partners, Academy families, staff members, athletes, their partners and families".
"Our thoughts remain with everyone affected, particularly the women involved. All women deserve to feel safe and respected," the statement read.
"We understand and share the hurt that many of you we will be feeling. To say we are disappointed is an understatement.
"We know that moving forward as a club will take time.
"Every member of our community will process this in their own way, and we do not take your trust or support for granted.
"We are committed to doing the work required to uphold the values, standards and culture we expect of everyone at the Sydney Swans."
A number of club sponsors have expressed concerns, but added that they would not comment on the matter while the police investigation was ongoing.
"QBE acknowledges the seriousness of the allegations that have been reported," a spokesperson told the ABC.
"We have no tolerance for conduct that compromises the safety, dignity or wellbeing of others and we support the club's position in condemning all forms of abuse and disrespectful behaviour towards women.
"Given there is an active police investigation it would be inappropriate for us to comment any further."
A spokesperson for realestate.com.au noted that the company was "deeply concerned" by the allegations and would await the findings of police investigations.
Meanwhile, Australian Red Cross Lifeblood has pulled out of a match-day activation ahead of this Sunday's double-header.
"Given the serious nature of the current investigations involving Sydney Swans players, we've decided to step back from planned match day activities with the Sydney Swans this Sunday," the statement read.
"We have shared our concerns directly with the club and we are in regular communications with them.
"As ongoing investigations are being conducted by the relevant authorities, it would be inappropriate for us to comment further at this time. Our focus remains on encouraging people to donate blood and plasma to help ensure patients across Australia receive the lifesaving treatments they need."
All five of the players have been suspended by the Swans for the rest of the AFL season.
The bans are separate from the police investigation and are related to the players' decision to continue drinking late into the night and bring women to their hotel, for which they have apologised.
Volkswagen Group Australia said it too was aware of reports and would pause its activities with all the players involved.
"Volkswagen Group Australia has clear values and expectations for the organisations and individuals associated with our brands," the statement read.
"We do not tolerate violence, assault, intimidation or abusive behaviour of any kind."
"In light of the allegations that have been reported, we have paused our activities with the players involved."
On Wednesday, Telstra said it was "deeply concerned" by the incident and that players "who are also Telstra Ambassadors are not participating in any ambassador activity while the investigation is ongoing".
Heeney and Warner have both represented the telecom in activations and advertisements this season.
"We will review their ambassador arrangements once the investigation is complete and will provide an update at that time," Telstra said in a statement.
Colgate Palmolive said it had "suspended" its personal partnership with Heeney "pending completion of the investigation."
The company said in a statement that it is "aware of reports regarding an investigation by Victoria Police" and that the company "take these matters very seriously."
Heeney's children's book pulled from shelves
Heeney's publisher, Allen & Unwin, has paused publication of the third book in his Little Isaac Footy Fever series, Super Swan, which was due to hit shelves in November.
"Allen & Unwin is aware of reports relating to Isaac Heeney and a Victoria Police investigation, and that his employer has exercised sanctions under club policy and his terms of employment," a statement read.
"We view this matter seriously and believe that the women involved deserve respect and support.
"We have paused promotion of his two books and the publication of his third book, while the police investigation is under way. We are unable to comment further while the matter is in the hands of the police."
Gleebooks, Readings and Big W have all confirmed Heeney's books have been removed from stores nationally.
"In line with our policy for all such matters, we removed Isaac Heeney's books from our shelves as soon as we were aware of his involvement in the allegations," a spokesperson for Gleebooks said.
Big W said it has paused all sales of the book "pending the outcome of this matter."
"BIG W regularly reviews its range of products to ensure it aligns with our values and community expectations," a statement read.
"We have decided to pause all sales of Little Isaac Footy Fever books in our stores and online."
Booktopia continues to stock the book but said it would "continue to assess the situation".
"We're working closely with the publisher regarding their plans and will continue to assess the situation," Booktopia said in a statement.
"We appreciate the sensitivity and will carefully consider any decision, together with the publisher, in due course."
Amazon and Dymocks have not responded to requests for comment.