In short:
Two native wild birds have been found in NSW with the deadly H5 bird flu, in a first for the state.
The state's first cases in migratory birds were recorded in early July on the Mid North Coast.
Australia now has 215 confirmed cases after an additional 10 birds were infected in Victoria.
The New South Wales government has confirmed the state's first cases of H5 avian influenza in Australian native birds.
One bird was found dead near Narooma on the state's south coast and the other near Wentworth in western NSW, according to the state government.
Both birds were greater crested terns.
"[The] birds were reported by members of the public to the Emergency Animal Disease Hotline and sampled by the NSW Government's H5 response team," the government said in a statement.
Surveillance in the impacted areas is continuing to "ensure early detection of any further cases".
Environment Minister Penny Sharpe said the cases were not unexpected and the state had been preparing for such an outcome.
"We remain well equipped to respond to manage further impacts,"
"We are using the best available data and tools to target actions for our most at-risk wildlife species and important natural places."
A total of four birds have now been infected in NSW.
In early July, the first two cases were detected in migratory petrel birds at Bennetts Beach near Port Stephens on the Mid North Coast.
The government said its preparedness measures included developing plans for 34 priority sites across the state, carrying out risk assessments and mapping, and conducting information sessions with all agencies involved.
"Governments are working closely with the poultry industry to strengthen biosecurity to mitigate the risk of outbreaks,"
"While there have been no detections in poultry in NSW, the poultry industry has been preparing for this and is across the risks and actions required at this point.
"We are continuing to work with our industry partners including key agricultural and wildlife stakeholders, ensuring the community has up-to-date information about our surveillance and response to detections of H5 bird flu."
Location of infections 'really big development'
Jane Bennett is the state's acting chief veterinary officer. She told the ABC the area where the birds were found came "out of the blue" due to how far away it was from previous detections.
"The one at Wentworth, which is down on the Murray, is quite some distance from the coast and these birds aren't naturally found that far from the sea," she said.
"So, an unusual sight and also the furthest inland that we've had a detection at this point.
"The one down on the south coast, down near Narooma, that's quite some distance from any previous detections."
It was a concern shared by Jack Gough, CEO of the Invasive Species Council, who described the finding at Wentworth as a "really big development" with major implications for the Murray-Darling Basin.
"It's the first time we've got [bird flu] really far inland in Australia," he said.
"This bird flu has been spreading really quickly; we've now got it in at least seven species across five states and for the first time turning up in that Murray-Darling Basin inland.
"And that's very concerning ahead of spring breeding time, in particular, and it really says the whole continent is opened up now for bird flu to be spreading."
Birds in inland wetland colonies, he added, were now susceptible to the devastating disease.
Ms Bennett warned the spread would significantly get worse after the initial impact on coastal areas.
"Evidence from overseas tends to suggest it will slowly creep inland from there," she said.
"We certainly know that it's going to affect our native bird species; to what degree we're unsure at this point in time."
Australian cases reach 215
The total number of infections in Australia has risen to 215, including 10 new cases that were confirmed in Victoria on Saturday.
"These were all from greater crested terns in south-west Victoria and Clyde in south-east Melbourne," Australian Chief Veterinary Officer Beth Cookson said.
South Australia has been hit the hardest by the virus, with Federal Agriculture Minister Julie Collins earlier in the week confirming the state's first mass mortality.
"Sadly, we do know that once the H5 bird flu is spreading in wildlife and the natural environment, it is not possible to avoid significant losses, which is what we're starting to see now," she said at the time.
On Friday, the Royal Adelaide Show announced it would go ahead in September without bird and poultry exhibits.
Anyone who sees a dead or sick bird is asked not to touch it and report it to the Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888.