In short:
At least five people have been killed, including a 14-year-old boy, during drone attacks in Ukraine's capital, Kyiv.
Ukraine's president says the strike on a 16-storey residential complex was "savage and sickening".
Two people were also killed in overnight drone attacks on Russia, which also struck an oil refinery and a passenger train.
At least five people have been killed, including a child, during drone attacks in Ukraine's capital Kyiv.
A 14-year-old boy died when a Russian drone struck a 16-storey residential building in central Kyiv.
An attack that Ukrainian President Volodymr Zelenskyy labelled "absolutely savage and sickening" and "devoid of any military logic".
A few hours later, four bodies were found in a parking lot following a separate daytime strike on an office building in Kyiv, according to Mayor Vitali Klitschko. Seven others were injured.
Meanwhile, in Russia two people were killed in Ukrainian strikes on an oil refinery and passenger train overnight.
Eight people have been injured in a drone attack on the Russian Ulyanovsk region, and four people have been injured in Voronezh, according to their respective governors.
Central Kyiv attacked
Reuters reported explosions heard in the centre of Kyiv early on Friday morning local time.
In recent weeks, Russia has waged ongoing attacks on Kyiv and the surrounding areas, with near-constant barrages of its faster and high-flying drones, which are harder to intercept.
Russia denies deliberately targeting civilians in the war, triggered by its full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022.
The strikes caused fires in non-residential buildings in two city districts, which was confirmed by emergency services.
On Friday, the Russian defence ministry said its forces had carried out overnight drone strikes on Ukrainian defence industry facilities, logistics centres and vessels used by Ukraine's armed forces.
Separately, Odesa region Governor Oleh Kiper said one person was killed and another injured in a series of "massive" Russian strikes on a residential area and logistics premises of a postal operator.
The United Nations said its monitoring mission in Ukraine had recorded at least 200 civilian deaths in September from attacks that also damaged "homes, hospitals, shops and workplaces".
Ukraine strikes Russia
Russia on Friday said a Ukrainian strike killed three aid volunteers from Siberia in the Moscow-occupied part of the southern Ukrainian Zaporizhzhia region.
Kremlin-installed official Yevgeny Balitsky said the volunteers were killed "as a result of a cynical terrorist attack on a civilian vehicle delivering humanitarian aid" near the village of Novobogdanivka.
Two people were killed in overnight drone attacks on Russia, which also struck an oil refinery and a passenger train, Russian officials said.
Russia's Defence Ministry said air defence units had destroyed 592 drones overnight.
One civilian was killed and another wounded when a Ukrainian drone struck a truck in Russia's Belgorod region, local officials said.
In the Perm region, which hosts a major oil refinery, Governor Dmitry Makhonin said one man had been killed during a massive drone attack.
Separately, Yury Slyusar, the governor of the southern Rostov region, said about 50 drones had been destroyed above his region overnight.
Mr Slyusar said a drone attack had damaged the Novoshakhtinsk oil refinery and suspended operations temporarily, but no casualties were reported.
Eight people had also been injured in a drone attack on the Ulyanovsk region, Governor Alexei Russkikh said.
Mr Russkikh said industrial and civilian infrastructure had been damaged in the region, which hosts a major electronics plant.
Russia's state railway operator also said that an electric locomotive and the first carriage of a passenger train travelling from Moscow to Tolyatti had been damaged.
The operator described the strike as external interference on a section of railway in the Samara region, injuring the train driver and forcing the suspension of rail traffic on the line.
Voronezh Governor Alexander Gusev said air-defence forces destroyed 88 drones overnight over the regional capital and at least six surrounding districts.
Four people were injured in Voronezh, alongside damage to residential buildings, vehicles and industrial facilities, Mr Gusev said.
Reuters could not independently verify the reports and there was no immediate comment from Ukraine.
Reuters