In short:
Alan Jones's former colleague has given evidence he did not see anything untoward at a 2008 lunch where a man alleges the veteran broadcaster touched his crotch.
Jason Morrison said Complainant C's demeanour was "nothing that worried me" in the Local Court on Monday.
Mr Jones has pleaded not guilty to 22 counts of indecent assault and sexual touching of six men.
Media figure Jason Morrison has told the trial of broadcaster Alan Jones that he did not see anything worrying at a lunch where a junior colleague has accused Mr Jones of touching his crotch.
Mr Morrison, who said he had known Alan Jones for more than 25 years, is giving evidence in his former colleague's criminal trial, where he has pleaded not guilty to 22 counts of indecent assault and sexual touching of six men.
The former 2GB host and producer is giving evidence in the NSW Local Court about a lunch Mr Jones hosted in 2008, where he allegedly touched a young colleague, Complainant C, on the crotch and upper thigh under the table.
Complainant C told the trial last week he believed other guests were looking at him from across the table, and said he believed they saw Mr Jones's outstretched arm going towards his lap.
He said after the lunch, some unnamed attendees at the lunch made a comment that he was "copping a feel" from Mr Jones under the table, a remark he said made him feel "deeply embarrassed".
On Friday the court heard from another lunch attendee, who said he recalled Mr Morrison and another man looking over at Complainant C at the table, and said the two men appeared "startled" and "amused" at Mr Jones swirling his wine with one hand while his other hand was under the table.
The witness said they could not see what was happening under the table.
That witness described Complainant C as appearing "distraught".
'Nothing that worried me'
Mr Morrison has so far told the trial Complainant C was "stuck with" Mr Jones at the "adult end" of the table, while attendees at the "fun end" were making jokes about the young man having to sit next to his "boss".
Asked by the crown prosecutor what Complainant C's demeanour was at the table, Mr Morrison said it was nothing that worried him.
"Smiling ... nothing that worried me, put it that way," he said.
"People worked weird hours with a tough job, and they let off steam.
"Nothing stands out, if that's what you're asking."
Mr Morrison was asked several times if anyone made any comments to Complainant C about Mr Jones after the lunch, or during the lunch.
He gave evidence that he could only remember general conversation and jokes about Complainant C being seated away from his friends at the table.
"Some people joked about how they kind of looked like a 'great couple'," he said.
"It wasn't really anything else other than banter."
Mr Morrison said at one point, Mr Jones had his arm around Complainant C while speaking to another guest, "in the manner somebody does when they're talking about somebody".
He said he worked with Mr Jones at 2GB in the early 2000s, and at various other times during his career.
Mr Morrison's has concluded for the day amid legal argument.
Complainant C has alleged Mr Jones indecently assaulted him eight times by touching him or kissing him in his Circular Quay apartment lifts, the lifts at work, or in a car.
Mr Jones denies any of the assaults happened.