In short:
Roosters coach Trent Robinson and Penrith coach Ivan Cleary have agreed the NRL is no longer a "level playing field" amid the tax-free wage concessions given to the incoming PNG Chiefs.
Cleary's Panthers are losing Brian To'o to the Chiefs, and he said teams can't compete with the new club if players want to go.
What's next?
The PNG Chiefs will enter the NRL competition in 2028.
Trent Robinson won't be raging about the inequality of the tax breaks afforded to the PNG Chiefs, even if he believes the NRL's open market is no longer a "level playing field".
After Penrith winger Brian To'o became the sixth player wooed by the start-up franchise's tax-free wages, Panthers coach Ivan Cleary declared clubs "can't compete" with the bounty the Chiefs can provide from 2028.
Cleary revealed he was in tears when To'o informed him he would leave Penrith to join the Chiefs, who critics - led by South Sydney coach Wayne Bennett - have said now have an unfair advantage in attracting talent.
The salary cap has been an equaliser of talent but Bennett has claimed the NRL has eroded the competition's fairness by giving the Chiefs such an upper hand.
The Chiefs' advantages are in contrast to the few concessions afforded to the Perth Bears, who will enter the NRL next season.
"It's not a level playing field and I think you can see that," said Sydney Roosters coach Robinson.
"We've got (it on) one (hand) where we feel like it's not a level playing field and the other where we feel like they need more assistance.
"We're going to debate ... but do we want our game to grow?
"We're not going to stop at 19 (teams) ... we should own the Pacific.
"If we want more money in the game, want to expand, we need more teams, so I think it's a positive thing - players are going to go."
Penrith were the latest club to feel that pinch when they gave To'o, who enters the last 12 months of his deal in November, a seven-day window to explore his options for 2028.
The winger signed with the Chiefs without visiting PNG, joining Jarome Luai, Connor Watson, Alex Johnston and Zac Lomax in agreeing to deals with the NRL's 19th side.
"I had a little moment the other day, just very sad that Bizza's going to be going," the usually stoic Cleary said.
"There would've been a few (tears) ... It's just hard to imagine 'Biz' playing in any other jersey. But there's a few guys out there that I thought the same."
Since their rise to premiership dominance in 2020, the Panthers have become accustomed to salary cap pressure squeezing out key players.
But they are especially vulnerable after 2027, with the cashed-up Chiefs emerging just as they battle to hold on to co-captains Isaah Yeo and Nathan Cleary, as well as premiership players Paul Alamoti, Liam Martin and Moses Leota.
"I think everyone knows with the Chiefs, it's hard to match that stuff," Cleary said.
"It's not your average club, but if players want to go there, you can't compete."
Asked whether the Chiefs had unfairly skewed the player market, Cleary recalled some wisdom from Marty Gurr, who was on the coaching staff during his early playing days at Manly.
"I remember when I first played 35 years ago, my first coach said to me 'rugby league isn't fair'," Cleary said.
"I think he was right. I've worked that out along the way. Whether it's fair or not, that's what the game's gone with. I can understand it."
Since overcoming the initial emotional blow of To'o's impending exit, Cleary has turned his attention to Penrith's task of retaining their stable of stars before September.
"We're very hopeful of having a few of them done (soon), you definitely don't want to be going into the finals doing this sort of stuff," he said.
AAP