In short:
South Australia's doctors' union says it is concerned "patient care is being jeopardised" because of alleged behavioural problems at the Gawler Health Service.
The nurses' union says it has has not identified any evidence "indicating systemic bullying by nursing staff".
What's next?
The Barossa Hills Fleurieu Local Health Network, which covers the Gawler Health Service, says it is investing in steps to support employees and strengthen workplace culture.
A patient's clinical care plan was allegedly blocked by a health service manager against the advice of specialists at a facility north of Adelaide, a report by the South Australian doctors' union claims.
The report by the SA Salaried Medical Officers Association (SASMOA) documents a litany of concerns about workplace culture at Gawler Health Service, including alleged "bullying, harassment and disrespectful behaviours from various nursing staff".
The report stressed that not all nursing staff were accused of such behaviour, but said doctors had been left feeling "anxious, distressed, and very concerned about their professional liability and that patient care is being jeopardised".
One incident detailed in the report involved a nurse who allegedly "snatched a mobile computer station from a doctor during a patient admission".
In another incident, the potential demotion of a senior doctor was "openly discussed" with colleagues without that doctor's knowledge or consent, the report stated.
The report, which alleges such behaviour was in breach of workplace safety requirements, has been submitted to watchdog SafeWork SA.
The report also claimed that the behaviour had implications for patient care.
"Workers described as terrible an incident of a manager overriding the clinical judgement of three specialist doctors and blocking a clinical care plan for a patient," the report stated.
The Barossa Hills Fleurieu Local Health Network (BHFLHN) - the SA Health division that covers the Gawler Health Service - said SafeWork SA representatives had visited the site on July 2, several weeks after SASMOA's inspection, and found no breaches of work health and safety laws.
The Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation (ANMF) said it took all such allegations seriously, but its representatives had not identified any evidence "indicating systemic bullying by nursing staff".
But SASMOA chief industrial officer Bernadette Mulholland said the concerns at the Gawler Health Service had been ongoing for "about 18 months", and that doctors felt local administrators "did not step in quickly enough".
"That made them feel angry, it made them feel a sense of anxiety," she said.
"What it does do is make people feel like they just don't want to come to work anymore.
"They were feeling not heard, not listened to, there were concerns in relation to anxiety - some people knew that their health was suffering because of the conflicts."
In a statement, ANMF SA branch secretary Elizabeth Dabars said it was important that such allegations be "properly investigated through appropriate workplace processes".
"Staff who are the subject of concerns must be given an opportunity to respond, and findings should be based on evidence," she said.
"Based on the information currently available to ANMF, some of the issues raised appear to extend beyond allegations of bullying and include broader matters such as staffing, workload, communication, leadership and clinical governance.
"These issues require constructive engagement and resolution by management in consultation with all professional groups."
BHFLHN chief executive Bronwyn Masters said SA Health was investing in steps to support employees and strengthen workplace culture.
"BHFLHN is committed to providing a safe and secure working environment for all of our staff and we work with them every day to ensure we are providing one," she said.
Ms Mulholland said Gawler Health Service was working to bring the doctors' and nurses' unions together to discuss solutions.
"We know that currently there's a review being done," she said.
"My understanding is it's happening now - they've got an external reviewer coming in to review and make recommendations about how improvements to that particular hospital site can be done."