Nepal-Tibet floods: Death toll rises as rescuers work through flood devastation - as it happened
Look back on our coverage from Friday August, 28.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Recap
Here is a summary of today's events:
- At least 579 people have been killed in Nepal and five in Tibet after deadly flash floods struck villages in the border region between Nepal and Tibet on Wednesday, with more than 1,900 missing in Nepal.
- The floods were likely triggered by a large chunk of ice breaking off a Himalayan glacier, according to satellite imagery, sending tonnes of ice and rock tumbling into a river below.
- The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade says at least 38 Australians are missing after one made contact with their family and was accounted for. The department is "urgently" seeking an update on the welfare of missing Australians. She says they were part of separate pilgrimages and tour groups. The department's 24-hour Consular Emergency Centre can be reached at 1300 555 135, or +61 2 6261 3305 (if calling from overseas).
- The Red Cross's local representative in Nepal said "entire villages and market areas" were wiped out by the flooding.
- If you want to help support the thousands affected by the crisis, the ABC is supporting the Emergency Action Alliance member charities and their local partners. You can find more information here, and make a donation here.
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
End of live coverage here
As dawn nears in Australia, we're going to launch a new blog.
The rescue efforts are continuing in Nepal overnight, so we'll be back very soon with any new developments.
Just return to the ABC News homepage to find our ongoing coverage.
I'll be with you again shortly.
New flood warning issued in Nepal
Authorities in Nepal have issued a new flood alert.
Acting on information from China, Nepal's Flood Forecasting Division said water levels on the Bhotekoshi River were rising.
It has urged people in the coastal area of Trishuli River to stay "in a safe place" until further notice.
Nepal turns down international search help
Nepal has turned down international help for its search-and-rescue operations.
Hundreds of foreign citizens are still missing in Nepal and several countries had asked Nepali authorities to allow their teams to help with the search.
South Korea has already sent a response team to Nepal and said it would dispatch a disaster relief team.
But Nepal's foreign ministry said that the country was managing the rescue efforts itself.
"The offer for help is natural. Our security agencies are doing the search-and-rescue operation," foreign ministry spokesperson Lok Bahadur Chhetri said.
"For now we don't require such help."
More than 300 Indian citizens missing after floods
About 320 Indian nationals are still missing in the aftermath of the floods near the Nepal-Tibet border, according to India's Foreign Ministry.
At least 400 Indian nationals were stranded but safe on the Chinese side of the border while another 96 had crossed into Nepal by land, the spokesperson said.
The Nepal Tourism Board says at least 80 Indian citizens have been rescued so far.
India's External Affairs Minister Subrahmanyam Jaishankar has met with more than 20 pilgrims from India who survived the floods in Nepal.
Europe pledges €2 million in aid
The European Union has promised €2 million euros ($3.2 million) in aid for Nepal.
The bloc's Commission chief Ursula von der Leyen said the "immediate humanitarian aid" would help "deliver life-saving assistance to families and communities hit hardest"
"My heart goes our to all those affected by the devastating flash floods," she wrote on X.
"Europe stands with you."
Nepali villages in pictures
More images of the damage and aftermath are starting to emerge in Nepal as some residents return to inspect their properties.
While some entire villages have been washed away, others have been buried in mud in the flash flood.
Aid supplies being helicoptered in
The World Food Progamme, which is operating out of a humanitarian staging area in Nepal's capital Kathmandu, says it managed to get supplies into affected areas within five hours of the emergency being declared.
The Australian government has allocated $2 million to the program as part its recent assistance package, which the Country Director Riaz Lodhi described as "crucial".
He said they still "don't know what the needs are out there" because roads have been cut to the worst hit areas.
Supplies are currently being helicoptered in, and work is underway to try to clear roads to allow trucks through.
"It's an enormous challenge given the magnitude of the disaster," he told the ABC.
Key Event
More than 1,900 people now missing in Nepal
There's been a substantial increase to the number of people now declared missing in Nepal.
The country's disaster management agency now says there are 1,924 people unaccounted for in Nepal after the natural disaster struck on Wednesday.
It says 517 of those people are foreign tourists.
At least 579 bodies have also been recovered, according to the Natural Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Authority in Nepal, which is higher than the last updated death toll from Nepal Police.
More than 550 people are missing in Tibet, according to Chinese authorities.
'Possible' more Australians missing in Nepal
Australia's Ambassador to Nepal has told the ABC it's "possible" there are more Australians missing following the disaster than have been reported.
At least 38 Australians are officially unaccounted for, according to the Department of Foreign Affairs.
Simon Ernst said the number of Australians missing was still "consolidating".
"Given the nature of what's happened, it's possible" more Australians could be affected, he said.
"The process is that we've been advised here in Kathmandu of Australians that were known to be in the area, but we've also had friends, family members in Australia indicating they have not had contact with (people), sometimes those individuals match up. Sometimes there are new cases," he said.
The ABC understands the Australian government has fielded 400 calls in relation to the disaster.
Chinese official says rescue effort reaches 'critical stage'
China's Embassy in Nepal says the rescue effort has reached a "critical stage" with two newly-formed barrier lakes at risk of overflowing.
"The landslide-dammed lake is currently at a high water level and has begun to overflow, posing a risk of further breach," the embassy's statement said.
"The situation is currently at a critical stage for rescue and emergency response in both Nepal and China."
It urged all emergency responders and people in the area to monitor any change in water levels and remain "highly vigilant".
Australian woman has 'days of trekking ahead' to escape flood zone
An Australian woman who was feared missing, but has since made contact with her parents, "likely has several days of trekking" ahead of her as she leaves the disaster area, Australia's ambassador to Nepal Simon Ernst said.
He said the fact 26-year-old Cara Severino had made contact with her family was "amazing news".
"The location where she's at is still, however, quite remote and I think, fair to say, she won't be able to return to Kathmandu the way she travelled there," he told the ABC.
But he said he couldn't comment further about her exit plans.
The Nepal Tourism Board says 121 tourists have been rescued so far, but has not identified any Australians.
Aerial rescues are being conducted in the wake of the disaster, but Nepal's Prime Minister has previously said they are being prioritised for the sick, pregnant women, children, senior citizens and people with disabilities.
Disaster 'still unfolding' with potential health risks mounting
Kamal Kishore, is the head of the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction.
He told a press briefing in Geneva that the region was still vulnerable to further cascading hazards.
"In a sense, the disaster is not yet completely over. It is still unfolding in some ways," he said.
In the same briefing, World Health Organization (WHO) spokesperson Tarik Jasarevic said six health facilities had been damaged in the landslide and that eight healthcare workers were missing.
"Following a disaster of this scale, displacement, overcrowding and disruption to water, sanitation and health services can increase the risk of infectious diseases, including diarrhoea and respiratory illnesses," he said.
Flood risk remains until lakes are drained, Nepal authorities warn
Nepali authorities say they're monitoring two lakes upstream of the flood zone after one of the lakes began overflowing.
Nepal's Disaster Management Authority said further flood risks would remain in place until the two lakes were fully drained.
The formation of one of the two lakes was captured in aerial footage by a Chinese rescue team yesterday, showing masses of brown water accumulating in a basin.
The imagery also showed another lake upstream that appeared to be growing in size and was bigger in surface area than the first lake.
Nepali authorities say they are relying on satellite imagery to track conditions and plan to install cameras and sensors downstream.
Key Event
Death toll in Nepal rises above 550
At least 553 people have died following the flood in Nepal, according to Nepal Police.
That is six more people than authorities reported a few hours ago.
More than 1,400 people have been injured.
The death toll in Tibet still remains at five people, according to Chinese authorities.
How can you help?
The ABC is supporting the Emergency Action Alliance member charities and their local partners based in Nepal as search and rescue continue.
Families and communities have lost their homes and are in urgent need of food, water, shelter and medical assistance.
Your donation will help provide food, water, financial support, emergency shelter and aid to people in crisis.
You can make a donation here to help provide essential items to those in need.
Donations of $2 or more are tax deductible.
What is the Emergency Action Alliance?
Emergency Action Alliance is made up of 15 Australian-based member charities who use their reach and resources to save lives around the world.
When a major disaster hits countries with limited capacity to respond, Emergency Action Alliance brings together the knowledge, expertise and resources of Australia's leading humanitarian charities.
Learn more about the EAA and its members here.
'Enormous trauma', Red Cross warns, as 93,000 people in 'great need'
At least 93,000 people are estimated to be affected by the Himalayan landslide, according to the Red Cross, as aid officials fear further flooding.
"We believe that at least 93,000 people have been affected and are in great need," David Fisher, head of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in Nepal, told a Geneva press briefing.
"The trauma of this event is enormous.
"We're of course very concerned about the secondary flood."
Trucks filled with relief supplies have been blocked from entering the region amid ongoing flooding concerns.
Reporting with Reuters
Candlelight vigil in Canberra
Around 80 people gathered outside Parliament House this evening to remember those killed, and those still missing, in Nepal.
A candlelight vigil was held at sunset, which included a minute's silence and a prayer given from Tibetan monks.
Nepali community leaders spoke of their heartbreak, and thanked Canberrans and the government for their support.
Nepali Community Priest Basu Dhakal delivered a prayer as part of the vigil.
"We cannot do anything about the nature. Everything happens," he said.
"But we can just pray for the speedy recovery of the victims.
"We can pray for the departed souls [to] rest in peace."
Key Event
Australian Michael Ryan Keats missing
Australian Michael Ryan Keats is missing in Nepal, his sister has confirmed on social media, after embarking on a pilgrimage to Mt Kailash.
The "adventurer" and "truly beautiful soul" was believed to be at the immigration centre on the Tibet Nepal border when the flood struck.
His sister, Karen Hayley, said Michael was with a tour organised by the Isha Foundation.
At least 11 Australians were believed to be part of that group, according to the group's founder Sadhguru Jaggi Vasudev.
His sister has posted on social media, urging anyone with information to get in contact, saying her grief was "already immeasurable".
"There is still hope and we are holding onto that with everything we have," she wrote.
"Time feels suspended somewhere between hope, prayer, fear and heartbreak.
"Nothing else matters but bringing him home."
Penny Wong speaks with Nepali minister
Foreign Minister Penny Wong has spoken with her Nepali counterpart, Shisir Khanal, this evening, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) has confirmed.
Wong shared her full comments via a post on X.
"I've spoken with Nepali FM to convey Australia's deep condolences and support for the Nepali people," she wrote.
The foreign minister reiterated Australia's commitment to providing humanitarian response specialists to help Nepal with the recovery effort.
The government says it will provide a $5 million assistance package that will include food, emergency shelter, clean water and sanitation.
Earlier today, the department released a statement on Australia's assistance package.
It read:
- $2 million to the World Food Program, which has already dispatched food rations and provided logistics support for Nepal's emergency response.
- $2 million to Australian NGOs through the Australian Humanitarian Partnership to provide support such as emergency shelter, hygiene kits, blankets, medical support and psychosocial support.
- $1 million to the Emergency Action Alliance to support locally led recovery and rehabilitation efforts in affected areas.
NT Nepali community report missing famliy members
Mona Ulak, who is the chairperson of Multicultural Community Services of Central Australia, says the Nepali community in Alice Springs is "deeply devastated".
"It's been an extremely distressing time, frantically trying to connect with family, friends in Nepal," she said.
Ms Ulak confirmed there were families across the Northern Territory who either had missing family members or had received reports of loved ones dying in the flood.
Nepal is a "beautiful small country", she said, prone to earthquakes and monsoon troughs, but this scale of disaster was "unimaginable".
"[This is] the first time I've seen in my life ... this level of catastrophe," she said.