'Humming' road trains deliver millions of WA bees to varroa mite-ravaged SA
Sun 26 Jul 2026 at 5:20pm
, updatedSun 26 Jul 2026 at 5:59pm
In short:
Millions of healthy West Australian bees are being trucked to South Australia to help pollinate almond trees.
Varroa mite has devastated wild and managed bee colonies in the eastern states, causing a shortfall for plant pollination.
What's next?
WA beekeepers want biosecurity bolstered as concerns grow about the mite's potential impact on food security.
Millions of West Australian bees are being trucked across the Nullarbor on a one-way mission to provide critical pollination for South Australia's almond industry.
Beekeepers are sending more than 7,500 healthy beehives to the neighbouring state where varroa mite has wreaked havoc on bee populations.
WA remains free of the bee parasite, but its beekeepers are nervous.
Three prime movers humming with mite-free bees have crossed the South Australian border and another two trucks will make the journey in the coming days.
The bees were purchased by a commercial almond grower in a deal understood to be worth more than $2.3 million.
A dozen WA beekeepers delivered their bees to collection points in Donnybrook, Gingin and Esperance last week, fetching $350 per hive.
In the nick of time
WA beekeeper Steve Sammut said the bees would be delivered right on time for the opening of the almond flowers, which is predicted to the precise day.
"It's two drivers, non-stop, all the way through to South Australia," he said.
"The hives travel with the entrances open because if it gets too hot the bees can come outside and sit on the front of the beehive.
"You definitely hear them on the outside [of the truck]."
Mr Sammut said the project had been in the making for several months after the same buyer initially purchased 600 hives this time last year.
He said the deal was "fruitful" for WA beekeepers who had enjoyed good conditions following last year's rain.
"Everyone's been able to achieve good results, as far as producing bees," he said.
Bees doomed by 'super mite'
Mr Sammut said while the delivered bees would boost almond pollination this season, they would eventually succumb to the deadly mite.
"This is the sad truth. These guys are going to get smashed," he said.
"We're just plugging a temporary hole.
"I put a blue dot on the queens ... they're in for a hard time."
WA beekeepers remain nervous about the varroa mite reaching WA, as the most recent incursion continues to devastate eastern states colonies.
"We call it the super mite," Mr Sammut said.
"It's now carrying viruses, so beekeepers are getting whole apiaries wiped out."
The WA government spruiked the delivery of WA bees to South Australia as evidence of its biosecurity success, but this left a bitter taste in Mr Sammut's mouth.
"The government has done nothing extra," he said.
"If you talk to people in DPIRD [Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development] right now, they'd love a budget to be able to get more people out there inspecting stuff coming into our ports, our rail ports, and coming across the border."
A spokesperson for the WA government said DPIRD was delivering surveillance at ports and airports across the state, including 40 sentinel hives, catch boxes, floral sweeps and aerial pheromone monitoring at high-risk entry points.
"We continue to work closely with beekeepers and industry to strengthen our preparedness, including developing the state's varroa response strategy," they said.
Not enough healthy hives
Bee Industry Council of Western Australia (BICWA) chair Kate Byrne said the mite had killed most of the wild bees in the eastern states since it entered Australia in 2022 and was now decimating managed hives.
She said two different types of the mite were present, including a strain resistant to miticide.
"Because those hives have collapsed, there is now massive demand for managed honey-bee hives," she said.
"There's an estimated 290,000 hive shortfall for August pollination on the east coast this year.
"There just simply isn't enough hives over on the east coast to pollinate the crops."
Ms Byrne said the situation was worsening and could impact food security.
"Decisions are having to be made around which crops will be provided with bees for pollination," she said.
Ms Byrne said BICWA's first priority was bolstering WA's biosecurity defences, and it was exploring options that included replacing sentinel hives with AI-capable detection units along the Nullarbor.