live
F1 live updates: Formula 1 Azerbaijan Grand Prix, Baku City Circuit
Oscar Piastri starts the Formula 1 Azerbaijan Grand Prix from third on the grid, with Mercedes' George Russell on pole.
World championship leader Kimi Antonelli starts 16th after a crash in qualifying.
Follow all the action from the Baku City Circuit in our live blog.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Live updates: Azerbaijan Grand Prix
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
Lap 3: Hadjar and Verstappen overtake Norris!
That's excellent from the pair of Red Bulls.
Norris just doesn't have the pace and Isack Hadjar breezed past the McLaren at Turn One.
Then it was Max Verstappen's turn, another incredible overtake.
Verstappen is absolutely flying.
Lap 2: Verstappen overtakes Hamilton
Superb racing from Max Verstappen - his old sparing partner Lewis Hamilton giving the Red Bull plenty of space at Turn One.
Verstappen has been given a new engine after some issues in qualifying and he will be looking forward to moving up the field now.
Lap 1: We're underway
Lights out and we're away on the streets of Baku!
George Russell with a great start but Oscar Piastri is up into second!
Lando Norris is into fourth too!
Max Verstappen is up a couple of places too and is into a battle with Lewis Hamilton!
An early neutralisation
Pirelli mentioned an 'early neutralisation' . I've no idea what that means ?
- Phillip
It's essentially a red-flag event where the racing has to stop.
There is precedent for that at Baku, where it's hard to collect the debris from a crash (see the branch below...)
Softs and mediums are the tyre choices for the start
George Russell is starting on a scrubbed set of medium tyres.
The next three on the grid are on softs.
Fifth-placed Lando Norris is on mediums, while Lewis Hamilton has the soft shoes on.
Then, the next three starts are on mediums.
It's a full slate of options from the top 10, that's for sure.
Time for the formation lap
There were 13 lead changes in the AFL Grand Final earlier today.
I don't think we'll get that many today in this race ... but you never know.
One thing that we can be certain about is that you have to expect the unexpected at Baku - there will inevitably be a crash at some point.
Anyway, the cars are out on the formation lap.
Conditions are good; warm, sunny and with less wind than during qualifying on Friday.
There are 51 laps on the menu today.
Bad Baku memories?
Cast your mind back 12 months or so to last year's Azerbaijan Grand Prix.
Leading the championship was Australia's own Oscar Piastri - he led teammate Lando Norris by 31 points heading into the race, with just eight remaining in the campaign.
At that stage Piastri had won seven Grands Prix.
However, in Baku he crashed out in qualifying, jumped the start in the race, and then crashed out there too on the first lap.
His championship charge never recovered, as Norris overhauled him to claim the title by 13 points.
That was, of course, completely different.
Antonelli leads George Russel by 81 points in the title race, and we haven't had the Azerbaijan race yet...
Antonelli also won the Italian Grand Prix from 19th on the grid in Monza just two races ago.
I don't know if I'd write him off.
But the parallels are perhaps there if you look hard enough...
The Baku City Circuit
Six kilometres long, 20 corners and a massively long straight.
The Baku City Circuit has been a spectacular addition to the Formula 1 calendar since its first use in 2016.
That long straight can create enough slipstream to negate even the Mario Kart additions of modern cars and create exciting overtaking opportunities around the wide, 90-degree Turn One.
The tight and twisty old town though, creates a treacherous dance between the walls where the slightest mistake can be punished.
The track has been a happy one for Aussie drivers.
Daniel Ricciardo won the first official Azerbaijan Grand Prix in 2017 (the 2016 race was the European Grand Prix, won by Nico Rosberg).
Oscar Piastri won here in 2024.
What will the strategy be?
According to Pirelli, a one-stop strategy still looks like it will work out best.
"The data gathered so far confirms that a one-stop strategy remains the most competitive option," Dario Marrafuschi, Pirelli Motorsport Director, told F1.com.
"Combinations involving the Medium and Soft compounds appear particularly effective given the limited wear levels observed.
"The use of the Hard compound in the second stint could become an alternative worth considering should an early neutralisation occur."
So there you go.
Piastri expecting Mercedes to fly away
Oscar Piastri was just speaking on Sky Sports coverage on Kayo.
"We looked pretty good on Thursday so hopefully we can keep that going," Piastri says.
"But I think to be quick by yourself is one thing; to be able to overtake people is another, so we'll see what we get.
"I'm expecting George [Russell] to drive off into the distance and I think we'll be looking at Kimi [Antonelli] in our mirrors pretty quickly.
"I think yesterday was a good result in terms of where we are on the grid.
"I think the gap to George [Russell] is a lot bigger than we hoped but it's always a chaotic race around here, so let's wait and see what we get."
I hope he looked both ways...
Azerbaijan National Anthem
It's time for The State National Anthem of Azerbaijan, Azərbaycan Marşı, which I have to say is an absolute belter, operatic in the same way you'd expect a James Bond theme to be.
That image is probably helped by the fact that the singer is in a tux and is absolutely belting it out with all the drama you'd expect.
I am a huge fan.
Key Event
Why is the Azerbaijan Grand Prix on a Saturday?
It may not have escaped your notice that it is, in fact, a Saturday evening and not the usual Sunday, when F1 races normally take place.
The reason for this is to avoid the race clashing with a national day of mourning in Azerbaijan.
The Remembrance Day takes place to honour those lost in the 44-day Nagorno-Karabakh conflict in 2020, and is observed with a minute's silence at midday.
Chadwick gets a chance in a Williams F1 car - and now she wants more
Jamie Chadwick is already something of a trail-blazer when it comes to women in motorsport.
And earlier this month she added another notch to her belt, becoming only the second woman to drive a Williams F1 car after Susie Wolff did so in 2015.
Chadwick had 32 laps of the Portimão Circuit in the 2025 Williams FW47, as the Portuguese track gets set to welcome F1 cars back in 2027.
"It was a phenomenal day and an incredible experience," Chadwick told F1.com.
"Few things can prepare you for driving a Formula 1 car at speed around a track like Portimão, but it was everything I imagined and 10 times more.
"I'm so grateful and incredibly happy with how the day went. It's an experience I'll remember for a very long time - I'd go as far as saying it's been the best day of my life so far."
Chadwick has been part of Williams since 2019 and was helping the team get data for the circuit's return.
"Jamie is an inspiration for millions of women and girls who has broken records at every level, and she has thoroughly earned this F1 test opportunity," Team Principal James Vowles said.
"Her feedback and performance were impressive as we knew they would be.
"This clearly shows there is a path for women to compete at the top level."
Lewis Hamilton, chess master?
Look at Lewis, still teaching the youngsters some things in and out of the car.
McLaren 'expect Red Bull and Mercedes to be very strong'
McLaren boss Andrea Stella noted that the Baku City Circuit did not particularly suit his team this weekend.
However, that made the third- and fifth-placed finish in qualifying all the more impressive.
He said that those positions were helped by some challenges faced by their rivals, meaning he expects a solid fight at the pointy end of the race.
"We expect Red Bull and Mercedes to be very strong," Stella said.
"This is a different competitive picture from Madrid, where we felt we had the quickest car and should have won without the Virtual Safety Car.
"Baku can, however, produce a long and eventful race, with tyre degradation, Safety Cars and other situations creating opportunities.
"Our objective will be to stay in contention, fight for the podium and be ready to exploit every opportunity that comes our way.
"We will focus on executing our race well and putting ourselves in the best possible position to capitalise."
Piastri due some luck
Evening Simon. The breadth of knowledge of you sports reporters always astounds me. I mean Michael goes from NRL to F1 and all points between. You can go from soccer to F1 to cycling etc. etc. Brilliant. I have a good feeling about Oscar tonight - he's really due for some luck. Have a good night.
- Phillip
Thanks Phillip, I consider having varied interests as watching a game of football one minute and the F1 the next, so we're very lucky.
Speaking of luck, Sky Sports have just reported that Lando Norris has a slight issue with his power unit.
McLaren said it was a fuel injection issue, which means Oscar Piastri has more power available to him at the moment.
Perhaps that's the bit of luck that he needs, in that it's an issue with his teammate's engine and not his.
Given Lando's virtual safety car issues in Madrid though, it seems the British driver can't catch a break...
Key Event
Piastri pumped with 'surprise' third-place
Oscar Piastri did not expect to be sitting on the second row of the grid for today's race.
The McLarens looked to be struggling around the Baku circuit, with Piastri and Lando Norris only achieving a high of sixth place through practice.
But it all came together in qualifying for Piastri, who won around this circuit in 2024.
"It's not the first time that's happened to us this year," Piastri said.
"We seem like we're a bit on the back foot through practice, we come out in qualifying and, yeah, we just find that bit extra.
"I was pretty surprised to see us 1-2 after the first lap of Q3, but unfortunately, we had no hope against George [Russell]. So, happy with how the weekend's gone so far."
Piastri said that it was "difficult to know" how the race pace would be, but he was cautiously optimistic about what he and the team could achieve.
"I think, honestly, our race pace [on Thursday] almost looked better than our one-lap pace," he said.
"So from that side of things I was pretty happy, but we'll have to wait and see.
"Obviously, it's always a bit of chaos around here, so we'll see what we get."
Russell won't rule out Antonelli surge
Mercedes pole sitter George Russell has refused to rule out teammate Kimi Antonelli as a threat to his victory hopes in today's race, despite the championship leader starting in 16th.
"Obviously, you can't discount Kimi," Russell said
"You know, started 19th in Monza and now he's in 16th, so, yeah, he should be leading by a few laps early this time," Russell added.
I think he was only half joking, too.
That being said, Russell has looked good around the Baku Circuit this weekend, so should be confident of recording what would be an eighth Grand Prix victory.
"I've been feeling in a great spot this whole weekend," said Russell said.
"You know, I'm just getting more and more on top of this car and what it requires, and it's just all feeling more intuitive.
"I'm feeling good.
"I think we're in a great place to go for the win but, of course, this is Baku and anything can happen ... but whatever happens, I feel confident that we can go for the win."
- with Reuters