Stockland's Halls Creek housing development fast-tracked by Queensland government
Fri 17 Jul 2026 at 5:24pm
, updatedSat 18 Jul 2026 at 12:21am
In short:
The construction of homes for a major housing development on the southern Sunshine Coast has been fast-tracked.
The Queensland government declared the controversial Aura South project a priority development area on Friday.
What's next?
Developer Stockland says the first of the houses could be complete within two years.
The construction of 12,000 homes will be fast-tracked as part of a controversial housing development on Queensland's Sunshine Coast.
The state government green-lit the Aura South project at Halls Creek south of Caloundra on Friday, declaring it a priority development area (PDA).
The declaration will see planning and development powers transfer from the Sunshine Coast Council to the state government, overriding any conflicts with the local planning scheme.
The news has disappointed environmentalists, who say the internationally recognised Ramsar wetlands site 3 kilometres from the Pumicestone Passage was never intended for urban expansion.
But the chamber of commerce has welcomed the announcement, saying the streamlined development will help address critical housing shortages.
Deputy Premier Jarrod Bleijie said Aura South would "play an important role as we work towards our target of delivering one million homes by 2044".
'Not intended for development'
The project was approved under the Environmental Protection Biodiversity and Conservation Act earlier this year.
Narelle McCarthy from the Sunshine Coast Environmental Council (SCEC) said she was disappointed but not surprised by the PDA declaration.
"This area was not intended for development and SCEC maintains its opposition to the urban expansion in the sensitive catchment close to the Pumicestone Passage within the regional into urban break," she said.
"We'll be watching this very closely and be taking particular interest and scrutiny of the environmental conditions."
Stockland general manager David Lenner said the company had gone through "the most rigorous and robust process ... related to environmental approvals in the country".
"It goes through the federal Department of Environment and leverages the EPBC (Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation) Act," he said.
Mr Lenner said protection of water quality and the management of run-off to the wetland were conditions of the approval.
"It also looks at things like frog habitat, preservation areas and conservation areas," he said.
Mr Lenner said more than half of the 1,200-hectare site would be dedicated to open space and conservation.
Project needed to match population growth
According to Mr Lenner, more than 35 per cent of sales in the nearby Aura North development went to first-time buyers, which he hoped would be the case at Aura South.
The Caloundra Chamber of Commerce said the development would be a "significant step forward" for the Sunshine Coast.
President Michael Shadforth said more housing was needed as the population grew ahead of the 2032 Olympics.
"I feel that it's part of a long-term pipeline," he said.
"We need to make sure that really hard-working families find it more affordable to live and more accessible to find jobs and accommodation."
Sunshine Coast Mayor Rosanna Natoli said 8,000 people were moving to the region every year, which made housing a priority, but it was important to protect "our lifestyle, our environment and the way it feels when you move around the Sunshine Coast".
Mr Lenner said the first homes of the development could be ready within two years.
"Certainly, our intention is to get moving and to deliver them as quickly as possible," he said.
Public consultation on Aura South is expected to begin later this year.