Chinese diplomats leave Labor conference in Adelaide after requesting Taiwan representatives be ejected
Thu 23 Jul 2026 at 9:30pm
In short:
Chinese diplomats left Labor's national conference after complaining to the ALP national secretary about the presence of Taiwanese officials.
The ALP has confirmed it made it clear that the representatives from Taiwan's de facto embassy in Canberra were entitled to attend as observers.
The incident could stir fresh tensions between China and Australia in the wake of several recent high-profile disputes.
Chinese diplomats left Labor's national conference after complaining to ALP National Secretary Paul Erickson about the presence of Taiwanese officials at the high-profile political gathering in Adelaide.
Three Chinese diplomats observing the conference confronted Mr Erickson on Thursday morning to demand that two representatives from Taiwan's de facto embassy in Canberra - the Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Australia - be ejected from the venue.
The incident was first reported by The Australian on Thursday.
The ALP has confirmed that Mr Erickson then made it clear that the TECO representatives were entitled to attend as observers, and would be allowed to remain.
China effectively stages walk-out in protest, source tells ABC
Multiple sources told the ABC that the Chinese delegation left the venue in the hours after the exchange, and did not join other foreign diplomats and political representatives watching the conference that afternoon.
It is not yet clear whether their departure was intended as a deliberate protest - although other diplomatic observers at the conference told the ABC that it was hard to interpret it in any other way.
One Labor delegate also told the ABC that it was "obvious" that China had effectively staged a walk-out.
"They lodge a protest, and then they leave - it's clearly a signal,"they said.
The ABC has asked the Chinese Embassy in Canberra why its diplomats left the venue, but it has not yet responded.
Incident could ignite new tension
An ALP spokesperson declined to say if the delegation gave a reason for their departure, saying it was a question for the Chinese Embassy.
The incident could stir fresh tensions between China and Australia in the wake of several recent high-profile disputes - including over Beijing's missile test in the Pacific, confrontations between China and the Philippines in the South China Sea, and Australia's new strategic pacts with both Fiji and Vanuatu.
The two representatives from Taiwan's office are attending as general observers rather than as "international observers" - which includes foreign diplomats and representatives of political parties from multiple countries.
But China has been taking an increasingly hard line on Taiwan as it tries to diplomatically isolate the democratically ruled island, and has been ramping up pressure on countries across the globe to cut or downgrade even unofficial ties with Taipei.
Last week, China heaped praise on Papua New Guinea after it announced that it would shut down Taipei's representative office in Port Moresby.
Political parties allowed to have Taiwanese observers in attendance, Chinese expert says
Mark Harrison, who is a senior lecturer in Chinese Studies at the University of Tasmania, told the ABC that nothing in Australia's One China policy - which acknowledges Beijing's claim over Taiwan without endorsing it - prevented political parties like the ALP from allowing Taiwanese observers to attend.
"Our One China policy applies to the national government - a political party is not bound by it," he said.
"If a political party wants to give an opportunity for an external group to observe, then it's entirely appropriate to do so.
"And given the deep trade complementarity (between Australia and Taiwan) it's entirely appropriate for these opportunities to be offered and taken advantage of."
Dr Harrison also praised Mr Erickson's response to the pressure from China, saying it was "an appropriate response to the effort by the Chinese side" to shape Labor's decisions.
"It's important from the Australian side that government and other organisations subject to that effort understand the importance of setting clear boundaries," he said.
The ABC has asked the foreign minister's office whether China has lodged any official diplomatic protests with Australia over the incident.