The United States has appointed a new ambassador to Australia, with the US Senate confirming David Brat for the role this weekend.
The appointment ends an almost 20-month vacancy.
Here's what we know about President Donald Trump's pick for the role and what his priorities will be in Canberra.
Who is David Brat?
Mr Brat is a former economics professor who spent two terms in the US House of Representatives as a Republican.
He shot to prominence in 2014 as part of the Republicans' conservative Tea Party faction, when he ousted the party's then House leader Eric Cantor in a primary.
It was a big deal, with the New York Times calling it "one of the most stunning upsets in modern political history".
Known for his Christian nationalist views, Mr Brat has a master's degree in divinity from Princeton Theological Seminary and his most recent roles have been at the deeply religious Liberty University in Virginia.
Last year he took aim at "moral relativism" on conservative social media platform GETTR, writing "why can the majority culture, Christian, not teach its values in our K-12 schools, when the Open Society and the Marxists can??" he wrote.
"Our Christian culture must WAKE UP. We are the Majority. We created Minority Rights. But the Minority does NOT get to dictate perversion."
Brat's views on tariffs, election interference and Ukraine
Mr Brat had a longstanding reputation as a free-market economist but has recently supported Mr Trump's tariffs and economic agenda, saying free trade is now impossible because US companies have "sold out" America.
Mr Brat has also long promoted the "deep state" conspiracy theories tied to the MAGA movement and behind Mr Trump's efforts to reshape parts of the US government and its intelligence arms.
Last year, he called the Biden administration's investigation into electoral interference a "conspiracy 1,000 times worse than Watergate".
He also accused the CIA and FBI of orchestrating a vast conspiracy to spy on "hundreds of Republican groups".
"The Strategy was clear, a threat to the entire system had emerged in the person of Donald J Trump," he wrote.
"The Matrix was in danger, the entire Deep State and Administrative State were under threat, so all hands on deck."
In the past, Mr Brat has opposed funding for Ukraine's defence against Russia and suggested NATO provoked Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
In 2022, he urged Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy as a "Christian brother" to accept Russian demands in the wake of Vladimir Putin's invasion, instead of committing to a war which would "devastate" Ukraine.
Why was the role vacant for so long?
The ambassador's post in Canberra sat vacant for nearly 20 months.
The US Studies Centre (USSC) says it is "not unusual" for the position to sit empty at the start of new presidencies.
Australia waited 18 months before the last ambassador's arrival and before that two years for Arthur Culvahouse, Mr Trump's pick during his first term.
However, the delay did not go unnoticed.
At Mr Brat's Senate confirmation hearing in May, the Foreign Relations Committee's top Democrat Jeanne Shaheen said she was glad the nomination had "finally" happened.
"It's delays like that that weaken American credibility with our allies," she said.
Who's held the role in the past?
Caroline Kennedy, the daughter of former US president John F Kennedy, was the last US ambassador to Australia.
She held the role from 2022 to 2024 during Joe Biden's presidency and was focused on bedding down the AUKUS agreement, which she called an "existential investment in Australia's sovereignty".
Kennedy also famously joined the Shitbox Rally, an annual charity fundraiser that involves people driving across the Australian outback in a cheap runabout.
She succeeded Mr Culvahouse, who left the position in early 2021, when Mr Trump's first term finished.
History has shown presidents have nominated people they share a personal relationship with over members of the foreign service, the USSC has said.
What are Brat's priorities in Australia?
At his confirmation hearing, Mr Brat said his priorities in Canberra were critical minerals and commercial diplomacy, defence cooperation and partnership in the Indo-Pacific.
He said he wanted to build on the opening of the Australian market to US beef, which had been a grievance of the Trump administration, to create a "level playing field" for other US exports.
He also flagged partnering with Australia's superannuation funds to "execute on plans to invest in the US" and going "full steam ahead" on AUKUS, which he called critical to "security for the South Pacific".
Mr Brat has no obvious connections to Australia, and at one point during the hearing he referred to Adelaide as "Adeline".
But he lauded Australia as a US ally, saying that "few countries are as integral to US interests as Australia", said he loved "everything" about the country and stressed that he was a "tennis fanatic".
"I follow your pros, the Open, and of course, the game of Prime Minister Albanese. I'm looking forward to sports diplomacy across the board,"
On Friday, Washington time, the same day Mr Brat's appointment was confirmed, Mr Trump announced the Pentagon would invest $560 million into a critical minerals project in a tiny NSW town.
The conditional loan provides it with a right of first offer on the mine's output of scandium, which is used in the aerospace, defence and automotive sectors.
It came after Mr Trump and Prime Minister Anthony Albanese inked a $13 billion critical minerals deal late last year. Mr Brat has pledged to execute that agreement during his time in Canberra.
What's the response been to his appointment?
After Mr Brat's appointment was confirmed, Foreign Minister Penny Wong said he would find Australia to be a "warm host and good friend".
"We share his priorities of critical minerals, defence cooperation and partnership in the Indo-Pacific. Together we will strengthen the alliance in the interests of both our countries," Ms Wong said.
Nationals Leader Matt Canavan welcomed the news, calling Mr Brat an "eloquent contributor" to policy debates in the US.
"He is obviously very close to Trump and the administration, which is what you want in an ambassador," he said.
USSC director of research Jared Mondschein has shared that view.
"What you want in an ambassador, regardless of whether you share his political opinion or not, is one who can get the attention of the US president," he said.
Loading...
However, outside of political circles, some commentators have been more critical. US analyst Bill Wyman described Mr Brat as an "undiplomatic person" and a MAGA political bomb thrower.
"This is not a sophisticated person. This is supposed to be a diplomatic position," he said.
He suggested Mr Trump may be "sending an ally over" to Australia's right, at a time One Nation's popularity is surging.
When previously asked whether Mr Brat was someone he could work with, Mr Albanese said he respected "the sovereignty of countries to put forward ambassadors, just as we expect our choices to be endorsed".
The US Embassy in Australia has been contacted for comment.