NRL wrap: Finals still possible for Bulldogs, Warriors go top, Knights stumble
Rookie Luke Hanson has booted a field goal to give the Warriors a 45-26 win over South Sydney that sent the Kiwi outfit to the top of the NRL ladder by the barest of margins.
With hooker Wayde Egan pulling all the strings at Stadium Australia, Andrew Webster's side joined Penrith and the Sydney Roosters on 38 points with a 19-point victory.
The win - the first by the scoreline in premiership history - helps the Warriors (+295) move past the Panthers (+294) on points differential after Hanson nudged a one-point goal from 30m out on the buzzer in just his second NRL game.
The third-placed Roosters (+163) have a game in hand and will play Wests Tigers on Sunday.
"As a team we weren't saying let's go kick a field goal because we need to," Webster said.
"We said every point's going to matter from here to the end.
"Once we kicked it we knew as staff, but I don't know if the players knew - you'd have to ask Luke, he's a pretty smart guy."
The Warriors host Newcastle and Manly over the final two rounds, while Penrith face Canterbury and Wests Tigers.
After Sunday's meeting with the Tigers, the Roosters square off with the Dolphins and Souths to round out their regular season.
"It might not be for too long and you only want to be on top at the end," Webster said.
"That's why we didn't mention for and against between now and then - we could win all our games and it could look different at the end."
While Webster's club bolstered their chances of a first minor premiership since 2002, and the chance to have a home final in week one, Rabbitohs coach Wayne Bennett was left frustrated.
A win would have locked up a top-eight finish for Bennett's Bunnies, who must now beat Gold Coast or the Roosters in their last two fixtures to qualify for the finals.
"What's between their ears? We're not real smart at different times out there," said Bennett, who all but confirmed Latrell Mitchell would return against the Titans.
"I'm talking about the game generally - a lot of things put us under pressure, but I'm never disappointed in the effort."
Meanwhile, Canterbury have kept their NRL finals hopes alive with a 44-14 thrashing of St George Illawarra, who are all but certain to collect their first wooden spoon as a joint venture.
Shifted to right centre, Matt Burton grabbed a try-scoring double to help the ninth-placed Bulldogs to a 24-0 halftime lead at the Sydney Football Stadium on Saturday night.
The Dogs bit back at concerns over their attack with their highest score of the season, halfback Lachlan Galvin setting up two tries and scoring one to seal a comfortable win.
Canterbury's clearest path into finals is to win both their remaining games, hope North Queensland lose one of theirs and then leapfrog the Cowboys on for-and-against.
That scenario relies on the Bulldogs beating premiership heavyweights Penrith next week and the eighth-placed Cowboys losing to either Wests Tigers or Canberra, neither of whom will play finals in 2026.
But for now the Dogs remain a top-eight chance, some 12 weeks since languishing in the bottom four.
The win may have come at a cost as veteran Kurt Mann picked up a groin issue after winger Enari Tuala (knee) dropped out before kick-off.
Earlier, Newcastle were left sweating on a Dom Young hip-drop tackle charge after he was sin-binned and their hopes of a home final were put in jeopardy in a shock 44-24 capitulation to Manly.
On a humbling Old Boys' Day in Newcastle, the Knights blew an 18-6 lead early to leave themselves potentially needing to beat the Warriors next week to stay sixth.
Making matters worse is Young being at risk of missing the start of the finals, over a hip-drop tackle that left Sea Eagles star Tolu Koula with a syndesmosis injury.
Koula will require scans, but a grade-three charge would be enough to rule the star Newcastle winger out of the opening week of finals given they have a last-round bye.
AAP
Follow the live blog below, keep up to date with all the latest stats in our ScoreCentre, and tune in to our live radio coverage.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Live: NRL and NRLW scores
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
Signing off
That'll do me, thanks for stopping by today everyone.
A good day of footy - lots of points, just a bit of drama and finals hopes stay alive (just!)
See you next time.
Key Event
Fulltime: Bulldogs 44 def Dragons 14
Crichton knocks over a penalty goal after the siren to round out the scoring and keep their finals hopes alive.
Key Event
76' Tracey gets one more Canterbury
Galvin goes to Preston who taps it back inside for Tracey to go over.
Excellent hands from Preston, he's played really well tonight.
Crichton knocks it over and it's 42-14.
Key Event
70' Feagai gets another
The Dragons are making the most of the numbers advantage and playing some good footy.
Again they strip the Dogs for numbers down the right in a very similar movement for Feagai's first try that ends with the winger getting his second of the night.
Holmes misses the kick and it's 36-14.
Key Event
64' Dragons pull one back
Couchman and Cook link through the middle and put Sloan away, he chips over Tracey and Burton fumbles the loose ball.
King-Togia picks it up and Burton holds him down. He's off to the sin bin.
A few plays later they strip the Bulldogs for numbers, Suli shows a great pair of hands to get it to Feagai in the corner and he's in.
Good footy from Saints. Holmes misses and it's 36-10.
Key Event
57' Dogs run up the score
Xerri brushes past Suli with ease and he's got Galvin in support to score.
The Bulldogs are having a party now. Crichton converts and it's 30-6.
Key Event
54' King goes over for Canterbury
Heyward goes short to King and the big man is claiming it!
The ref sends it up as no try but he got it. He doesn't get many and he's going crazy.
Nice to see. Crichton converts and it's 30-6.
Key Event
49' Dragons go in for a try
The Dragons have some joy - they caught Burton creeping in and King-Togia hits Holmes who swerves inside and scores!
Long way to go but that's a start. Holmes converts his win try and it's 24-6.
Second half is underway
And we're halfway home.
Match report: Warriors beat Souths in crazy game to go top
The battle for the NRL's minor premiership is set to go down to the wire after the Warriors downed South Sydney 45-26 to go top of the table.
With hooker Wayde Egan pulling all the strings at Stadium Australia, Andrew Webster's side joined Penrith and the Sydney Roosters on 38 points.
The Warriors (+295) needed to beat Souths by 19 points to move past the first-placed Panthers (+294) on points differential.
And they did just that with rookie five-eighth Luke Hanson's 80th-minute field goal getting the job done after the Bunnies nearly pulled off a spectacular second-half comeback.
The Roosters (+163) have a game in hand and will play Wests Tigers on Sunday.
Even if this was a bit of a Jekyll and Hyde performance from the Warriors, Webster's side, who lost winger Dallin Watene-Zelezniak to a shoulder injury, showed signs that could be a genuine contender to be back at Saturday's venue come grand final day.
Deploying fourth-choice No. 6 Hanson with Chanel Harris-Tavita, the Warriors hit the Rabbitohs with a sledgehammer in the first 20 minutes with tries to James Fisher-Harris, Leka Halasima and Mitch Barnett.
Jack Wighton and Alex Johnston hit back for the Bunnies before Harris-Tavita backed up a blistering Eddie Ieremia-Toeava break to put the Warriors back in the box seat.
Fullback Taine Tuaupiki converted Harris-Tavita's try and then added a penalty to give the Warriors a 26-8 halftime lead.
Watene-Zelezniak crashed in on the right straight after the break, before trudging off.
Souths' problems were only amplified by their struggles from the tee, with Jayden Sullivan missing both of his first-half efforts.
But the playmaker made no mistake with his next three as Johnston, Cody Walker and Tallis Duncan all crossed in a 12-minute onslaught.
The Bunnies were just six points behind with 20 minutes left, but tries for Jacob Laban and Alofiana Khan-Pereira moved the Warriors out of sight.
Leading by 18 heading into the final minute, Hanson showed a calmness by receiving an inside ball from Harris-Tavita and slotting a one pointer from 30m out.
The Warriors host Newcastle and Manly over the final two rounds, while Penrith face Canterbury and Wests Tigers.
The Roosters square off with the Dolphins and Souths to round of their regular season.
AAP
Halftime: Bulldogs 24 lead Dragons 0
Pretty comprehensive stuff for Canterbury who are well on top.
Key Event
38' Burton gets an easy one
The Dragons go for a shift deep inside their own half, Atkinson throws a pass to nobody, Kiraz scoops it up and pops a pass to Burton for an easy try.
That's his second of the night, the edges are starting to fray for St George Illawarra. Crichton converts and it's a big lead now at 24-0.
36' Dragons can't quite close
Crichton loses the ball on the first tackle! Saints straight back on the attack.
Flanagan's kick is deflected and batted dead. Holmes gets over and looks certain to score but they hold him up.
Flanagan tries to hit Suli short but gets it wrong and Xerri intercepts it.
34' Dragons go close to scoring
The Dragons might have one here - Holmes got into some space and fired it back inside, Galvin knocked it down, Stewart gathers it in and he's claiming it!
I don't know if it'll stand though - I think Stewart fumbles the ball as he slid towards the line and the Bunker agrees.
Bulldogs ball.
Injury: Jacob Liddle
The sniper's got the Saints hooker, he's gone down untouched and is reaching at his leg. He's being helped off now and you'd think his night is done.
Key Event
29' Dogs go back-to-back through Preston
Canterbury are on a roll now, Salmon made a strong bust and next play Galvin hits Preston short and he surges through some soft defence to score.
Crichton converts and it's 18-0 to the Bulldogs.
Key Event
27' Burton goes in for Canterbury's second
Flanagan gives away a penalty for a high tackle and the Bulldogs are on the attack.
They spread it right, Galvin holds the pass up nicely and Burton - whos' enjoyed a good couple of weeks at centre - brushes past Holmes easily to score.
Crichton smokes it over from touch and it's 12-0 Bulldogs.
21' Dragons can't close despite break
Atkinson drops a bomb and the Bulldogs are on the attack and after more points.
Galvin drifts across the field and puts in a grubber but Suli cleans it up, then puts Feagai away, he's dragged down 70 metres later to flip field position!
But they can't crack them and Holmes gets wrapped up on the last.
18' Dogs get the challenge
A Canterbury error from Tracey puts Saints on the attack but the Bulldogs will challenge.
They'll get it as well - Flanagan knocked it on first. Dogs keep the ball as Sua comes back on the field.