Sydney AFLW captain Lucy McEvoy wasn't sure what to expect for her side when they ran out for the first instalment of a historic double-header at the SCG.
The Swans dominated headlines across the country all week, filling both front and back pages of every newspaper, for a scandal that called the club's culture into question.
What the women's team got was an outpouring of support which broke the side's attendance record with 16,672 fans filling the stands to watch them play.
That is more than double the previous club record of 8,264.
"It's amazing. We weren't sure what we were going to expect this week, but to see the support that we've received today is just unbelievable," McEvoy told Fox Footy after the game.
"The members and fans are so tight and they know that we're united as a club and we're better than what we were at the start of the week.
"I'm just so grateful to have the support that we had today and the girls were able to turn it on.
"We had a few nervous girls, that's for sure, but we absolutely turned it on."
The scenes were particularly celebratory on the ground post-siren, after Sydney beat Essendon by 24 points.
It was just the second time the women have played on the SCG for premiership points and the first in a double billing with the men's.
Before locking in to warm up, star men's players Errol Gulden and captain Callum Mills got around the women's players.
Gulden was also seen going up to the crowd giving the fans a big thank you for turning out in droves.
Some of those fans left before the men's game, as a boycott had been suggested in the days before the match as a scandal continues to engulf the club.
It's unclear how many fans left in protest to the scandal, but a steady stream was seen leaving.
Five players - Isaac Heeney, Nick Blakey, Chad Warner, Riley Bice and James Jordon - have been stood down by the Swans for breaching the club's standards on drinking and staying out late following last Sunday's win over Essendon in Melbourne.
Police from Victoria's sexual crimes squad are separately investigating a report of sexual assault, which the ABC understands centres on a player allegedly touching a woman without her consent.
Police have not made any arrests or laid charges.
Lulu Clarke, who has been a Sydney Swans fan for as long as she can remember, was one of the fans who walked out.
Ms Clarke had bought a ticket to the men's game, unaware the women were also playing, but once the news broke of the incident she knew she would not be staying for both games.
"Of late, I've definitely drifted apart from the Swans and the AFL industry as a whole," Ms Clarke said.
"I decided that I'm absolutely not going to the men's game, even if those five players were still stood down. There's no way I could just show up and watch it. It just didn't sit right with me."
Former Matilda Sarah Walsh also left the stadium after the women's game, saying it had been a "tough week", but stressed she was not boycotting the men's team.
"It's not a new story but I have a five-year-old daughter who I brought here today to support the women's team," Ms Walsh said.
"I think you can have a club and not expect someone to be a fan of both teams.
"I think that's the nuance of sport, don't expect Socceroos fans to be Matildas fans ... We've got a long way to go in society. I don't think this is a Sydney Swans issue at all ... it's a societal issue and we all need to do better."
Swans fans Kayley and Georgia told ABC News they were there to support the women and will likely just watch a bit of the men's game.
"It's very disappointing from the men's team ... I feel like we were very disappointed in everything that happened," Georgia said.
Kayley said the situation was upsetting.
"We've been supporting the Swans since we were kids as well. So, it was just shocking," she said.
"We never thought that any players from this team could do something like this. It was really upsetting."
Many fans held signs during the game along the lines of "I'm here for AFLW".