It was a tournament where the football was magical, the off-field antics were questionable, and ultimately, Spain left the United States as the champions of the world.
- ANALYSIS: Tears streaming, Messi departs World Cup stage a legend
- QUICK HITS: Trump crashes Spain's party as Argentina combusts
- HALF-TIME SHOW: Shakira, Madonna, BTS and Justin Bieber's random collaboration
- BLOG: Every moment of Spain's World Cup triumph as it happened
A day after the utter chaos of the third-placed playoff between France and England, where 10 goals were scored, Argentina and Spain played things a little more conservatively - right up until the game exploded into action.
Here are the 13 photos that tell the story of the 2026 FIFA World Cup final.
1. The Fresh Prince of Barcelona
While much of the tournament had been focused on the more established superstar names like Lionel Messi, Erling Haaland and Kylian Mbappé, teenager Lamine Yamal had floated under the radar for the World Cup passers-by.
Coming to the final having never lost a match where he had started for Spain, expectations were high on the 19-year-old as he came into the stadium. Would he be the hero that Spain needed to overcome the perceived might of Argentina?
Whatever the pressure, he arrived looking like the coolest dude on the planet, calm, collected and rocking a style straight out of The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air.
2. Smoke and mirrors
All eyes turned to the skies before kick-off as US President Donald Trump made his usual subtle entrance into the area, coming in low and fast in the Marine One helicopter.
Once settled in prime position in a corporate box on the wings, Trump was afforded the questionable chance to give the trophy a little pat as FIFA boss Gianni Infantino brought the iconic gold statue to Trump's seat.
Before that, though, there was the potentially awkward meeting between Trump and Canadian Prime Minister Mark Carney, just a couple of days after Trump accused Canada of being "filthy" and "polluted" over its wildfire smoke that had blanketed New York in the lead-up to the tournament.
All-in-all things seemed reasonably diplomatic, given Mother Nature had done her job to send the smoke packing just in time for the game.
3. America makes a double Buff
In the most American moment of this entire game, event organisers decided that what this little old soccer match needed was a double Buffer.
Bruce and Michael Buffer, to be exact, the legendary ring announcers from every blood sport imaginable.
Flipping from one brother to the next, the pair excitedly announced that the game was "ready to rumble", in scenes not far off that time that soccer came to Springfield in The Simpsons.
4. The GOAT meets the rising star
Looking a little less cool than when he arrived, but still the picture of confidence, Yamal made a beeline for Lionel Messi before the match to wish arguably the greatest player in history some luck.
It was a full circle moment for the pair, who originally met on a photo shoot in 2007 when Yamal's parents won a Unicef raffle to have Yamal photographed for a calendar with the then rising star Messi.
This time around Messi's hair was a little shorter and his face a little more wearied, while Yamal was a little less nude.
5. The World Cup's Mariah Carey
Shakira was rolled out for the halftime show, with the Colombian star fast becoming to the World Cup what Mariah Carey is to Christmas.
She's just always there.
While her performance was fantastic, the rest of it - from Justin Bieber to Madonna to BTS - left a little bit to be desired.
So much so that English footballing champion Wayne Rooney didn't hold back with what he thought.
"I thought it was crap," he said on the BBC coverage.
6. The spectacular red card
As soon as we all saw it happen on the TV, we knew that the photos were going to be spectacular.
And veteran Getty photographer Al Bello didn't let us down.
Rising Spanish star Pau Cubarsi was sent flying by Argentina's Enzo Fernandez, but it was made all the more spectacular by Cubarsi really leaning into the flip.
Had Fernandez not already had a yellow, it's unlikely he would have been sent off at all, but the red card made it all the more dramatic as the scores stood at 0-0 heading into the death.
7. Hydration break goes to a new level
Two things have been major talking points during this tournament - it's been bloody hot and the hydration breaks have been bloody irritating.
So it was fun to see the two come together in the final regular time break of the tournament, as the Spanish players took advantage of the sprinklers to cool off.
Was it the trick that won them the World Cup? Who's to say. But almost certainly yes.
8. Free kick wipes a goal
In a moment of brilliance, Nico Williams looked to have won it for Spain when he slotted a goal past the keeper to make it 1-0 late.
But the referee called it back. There was a free kick somewhere in the mess of bodies in the box.
In live action it wasn't immediately clear where the free kick was. On replay, it still wasn't totally clear.
But on the fifth or sixth watch - yeah, no idea.
Williams was furious, and rightfully so.
9. Deadlock ends in headlock
Go back to the very first photo at the top of this story and you can experience the majesty of the Ferran Torres goal that broke the game open.
Hair blowing in the breeze, his teammates running in behind him, the fans screaming and cheering in ecstasy.
And then Williams decided to choke Torres for some reason.
Angry that he wasn't the hero after his goal was wiped? An in-joke that we don't know about?
Who knows. But it made for an odd scene in an incredible moment.
10. Tears of a legend
Small in stature but grand in legacy, Messi cut a forlorn figure after the final whistle.
His tiny body huddled in the middle of the massive stadium was enough to make anyone feel sorry for the attacking superstar.
His place as the greatest player the game has ever seen would have been secured had he managed to drag his teammates to victory, but even Messi couldn't get his countrymen through the incredible defensive wall that Spain had built.
11. Infantino chases after Trump
Trump had made headlines this time last year when he joined Chelsea on stage for the celebrations in the Club World Cup final, despite the apparent confusion of the players.
This time there was surely no way that Trump would be caught right in the middle of the pack as the Spanish players lifted the most coveted trophy in world sport, right?
Well, kind of. This time Trump wandered right across stage as Infantino pivoted left, leaving the FIFA boss to scramble after the US president, with the pair awkwardly caught in the team celebration photos.
On the broadcast, you could hear someone say "they'll crop him out" in an unexpected, but funny, hot mic moment.
12. Utter heartache for Argentina
Goalkeeper Emiliano Martinez had been immense through the World Cup.
But as Spain lifted the trophy, the Aston Villa keeper let the emotions flow, caught by the camera as he sat on the sidelines thinking about what might have been.
It was a reminder of what this thing, this silly, epic, immense mess of a game, means to the people who play it.
13. The love of a mum
In the end, all we really want is the hug of a mum who's proud of you.
And that's what Yamal got as his mum, Sheila, ran onto the ground to give her son a big old cuddle.
Having given birth at just 16 years old as an immigrant from Equatorial Guinea, Sheila's story is the one that really captures the essence of the World Cup.
Not the championship rings or corporate boxes. Not the powerful men in powerful suits making powerful political moves.
A mum with a dream for her son to shine on the world stage.
This was the moment that really mattered.