In short:
Workers at one of WA's two remaining coal mines have walked off the job, citing concerns over pay and their future employment prospects.
More than 100 staff from Premier Coal took part in the two-hour stoppage ahead of the 2030 shutdown of state-owned coal fired power generation in WA.
What's next?
Premier Coal says it remains committed to reaching a fair and sustainable deal with its remaining workforce.
More than 100 mine workers have been joined by Collie residents in a push for higher wages ahead of the WA government's planned shutdown of coal-fired power generation in the state.
The workers from Chinese-owned Premier Coal, the main supplier to the state-owned Muja and Collie power plants, began a two-hour work stoppage at 4pm on Tuesday.
The state government has promised to shutter both power stations, located 200km south of Perth at the heart of the state's largest electricity grid, by 2030, despite doubts over replacement generation.
The Mining and Energy Union said workers were opposed to proposed roster changes, some of which, it said, could result in staff losing about $30,000 a year in penalty rates.
MEU district secretary Greg Busson estimated average annual salary sat at about $150,000 a year, with more than 90 per cent of the mine's workforce unionised.
While Premier had offered a twelve per cent increase spread over four years, Mr Busson said the union wanted any increase front-loaded.
"Depending on which roster the company choose to move to, it could mean up to $30,000 a year reduction in people's wages," Mr Busson said.
"They need to maximise their income for the last bit of the working coal mine."
Workers now work 12-hour shifts on a four-days on, four-days off, four-nights on, four-nights off rotation.
Mr Busson said two of the proposed rosters would effectively end night shifts and associated penalties.
"The worst [roster] is 8.5 hours all-day shift, Monday to Friday, because they lose all their penalties for weekends and night shift," he said.
A Premier Coal spokesperson said the company was committed to reaching a fair agreement.
"Premier Coal has participated in good faith negotiations throughout the enterprise bargaining process," the spokesperson said.
"Our focus remains on the safety of our workforce and the continuation of safe and efficient operations."
Anxious about other work in Collie
Mr Busson said $150,000 a year might seem a generous salary, but the work was often dangerous and the pay was less than that taken home by coal workers in other states.
He said workers were also anxious about finding other opportunities in the town as mining operations wound down.
Mr Busson said that was despite the state government spending more than $700 million on a transition fund to help the town survive the end of coal.
"As hard as the government is trying, we haven't got any new industries in Collie yet," he said.
"Some of these people have to make hard decisions about moving their families away, which is not what anyone wants."
A state government spokesperson said a number of industries in the Collie Basin were being supported and pointed to the creation of 500 jobs during the construction of Synergy's big battery.
"The Cook Labor Government is committed to Collie's Just Transition, with more than $700 million allocated to support the community and workers," the spokesperson said in a statement.
"This includes $3.2 million to support Premier Coal's workers, including contractors, affected by the company's recent shutdown.
"Together with the recently released Plan for the Collie Basin, which outlines how former coal mining and power generation sites can be repurposed for future industry, the government is continuing to invest ... to secure more local jobs and economic opportunities for Collie well beyond 2030."