NRL wrap: Dylan Brown, Harry Grant and Dylan Lucas all injured across twin Friday night thrillers
Some of the NRL's biggest names will be missing for the run to the finals after injuries struck in two Friday night thrillers.
Newcastle will likely be without Dylan Lucas and Dylan Brown for the rest of the season after the Newcastle duo suffered ankle and knee injuries in their 23-22 loss to the Roosters which was sealed by a late Daly Cherry-Evans field goal.
Lucas was injured in the first half after twisting awkwardly in a tackle and was later transported to hospital with a broken and dislocated ankle.
The severity of Brown's injury is yet to be confirmed but there are fears the million-dollar halfback has torn his ACL after going down without contact in the second half.
"That's tough at the moment," Newcastle coach Justin Holbrook said.
"It could have been one of one of our best wins tonight with what we had to deal with ... and that's why it's so devastating for myself to sit here now with a side that you can be so close to being so happy and yet we're not.
"The docs, physio is not thinking it's good (on Brown), but cross my fingers and hope we get some good news with the scans.
"(With Lucas) he's dislocation straight away, and so that's back in, which is good. But just got to see how much damage around that's been done as well."
A James Tedesco hattrick was the highlight for the visiting Roosters, who claimed their fifth-straight win to secure their place in the top four but they didn't escape unscathed with veteran winger Daniel Tupou facing further time on the sidelines with a shoulder problem.
Meanwhile, Melbourne captain Harry Grant has suffered a hamstring injury in a 28-26 loss to South Sydney that leaves the depleted Storm's NRL finals aspirations hanging by a thread.
Their hopes of a 16th consecutive finals berth now hinge on five consecutive wins to finish the regular season and even that may not be enough.
"I don't know whether he's torn the hammy or if it's a bad strain but the way he came off, we're hopeful to see him as the year goes on but we might not see him again," said Melbourne coach Craig Bellamy.
"He'll go for a scan some time this weekend and we'll find out how bad it is and what the plan will be.
"I can't remember the last time we had as bad a run as we've had with injuries but having said that there's a few teams. I'm not sure why that is."
Grant is set to miss at least some of the fight for Melbourne's season, joining big names Cameron Munster, Xavier Coates, Eli Katoa, Tui Kamikamica and Will Warbrick on the pine.
The Queensland hooker pulled up sore popping a pass up for Trent Loiero just before halftime in Friday's clash at Stadium Australia.
He limped to the sidelines and threw his headgear to the ground in frustration.
After a torrid week that claimed David Fifita (suspension), Cam Murray (calf) and Tallis Duncan (hamstring), the Rabbitohs lost their own hooker Brandon Smith (calf) to injury.
But the victory was crucial to South Sydney's own finals hopes, which had been thrown into jeopardy with two losses from their previous four games.
A Campbell Graham try in the 76th minute off a fine pass from Ashton Ward proved the difference in an 11-try thriller.
ABC/AAP
Follow the live blog below, keep up to date with all the latest stats in our ScoreCentre, and tune in to our live radio coverage.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 11:08pm
Signing off
That'll do me - thanks for stopping by everyone for what proved to be a crazy night of footy.
Be sure to tune in again tomorrow when we'll have all the updates on tonight as well as live blogs for all three of tomorrow's games.
Take it easy.
LoadingFri 24 Jul 2026 at 10:46pm
Rabbitohs press conference
Wayne Bennett is speaking now after South Sydney's win but he's not saying much, just cracking off one-liners.
Cody Walker praises Ashton Ward's recent form.
"He's been wonderful for us. He's got a few errors in his game but he's finding his feet and finding them well. It's a pleasure to play alongside him."
Bennett says he's not sure what state Brandon Smith is in after his calf injury.
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 10:32pm
Melbourne press conference: Harry Grant update
Storm coach Craig Bellamy is speaking now.
"We scored enough points to win an NRL game. We just didn't defend well enough."
He has an update on Harry Grant's hamstring injury.
"I don't know whether he's torn the hammy or if it;s a bad strain but the way he came off, we're hopeful to see him as the year goes on but we might not see him again," Bellamy said.
"He'll go for a scan some time this weekend and we'll find out how bad it is and what the plan will be.
"I can't remember the last time we had as bad a run as we've had with injuries but having said that there's a few teams. I'm not sure why that is."
Key Event
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 9:56pm
Fulltime: Rabbitohs 28 def Storm 26
Melbourne's final chance goes nowhere and the Rabbitohs hang on to win a crazy game of footy.
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 9:54pm
78' Walker saves it for Souths
Keeley throws a desperate offload that's intercepted by Walker. That might be their last chance.
Key Event
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 9:52pm
76' Graham takes the lead for Souths
A tricky Walker kick from deep inside his own half kicks up on Fa'alogo and he knocks it over the sideline! Souths on the attack.
Ward pulls the trigger on a cut out pass and puts Graham over in the corner! They caught Melbourne short out wide again.
Ward from touch....he slices it wide. Souths 28-26.
Key Event
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 9:46pm
72' Meaney strikes for Melbourne
The Storm are in! They set up some nice shape down their left, Hughes goes wide to Meaney, he digs into the line and gets on the outside of Seigwalt to score.
Melbourne are back in front - Wishart from out wide.....no good. But the Storm are up 26-24 in a ten-try thriller.
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 9:43pm
70' Storm win a key challenge
Howarth throws the ball inside near the sideline, Graham cleans it up but he's ruled to already be out when he picks up the ball.
Melbourne challenge because they say it was touched by Wighton or Graham....and it was forward off Wighton, the Storm will get this.
Fresh set for Melbourne around halfway. Can they take the lead?
Key Event
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 9:40pm
69' Wishart does it all himself
Toelau snags a set restart and they're on the attack and in the blink of an eye Wishart slashes his way through and scores!
This game is back alive, once Wishart converts it's 24-22 with plenty of time left.
Key Event
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 9:36pm
65' Radel caps some beautiful football
Graham puts Dufty away down the sideline with a good offload but he's dragged down by Utoikamanu of all people! Next play Ward kicks for himself and regathers but Fa'alogo just manages to drag him down, next play Radel - the bench prop - manages to bash his way over to cap a sensational period of play.
Ward converts and it's 24-16, they feel close to victory now.
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 9:32pm
61' Double try-savers for Souths
Utoikamanu puts Toelau away with a great offload, he takes on Dufty and beats him but Koloamatangi just manages to ankle tap him!
Next play Hughes kicks, it's batted down to Meaney and he goes for the line but Walker and Siegwalt just manage to pull him down short! Great last ditch efforts from Souths.
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 9:28pm
59' Souths win a challenge but lose Smith
Brandon Smith strips the ball but it's ruled there's two in the tackle and Souths will challenge. Tuimalatu-Brown appeared to have a hand on a second defender, dunno which way this one goes.
The Bunker rules that because the second defender wasn't taking an active role it'll be Souths ball. Smith goes off with the calf injury he's been carrying and the Rabbitohs go on the attack.
Key Event
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 9:25pm
57' Souths get another through AJ
Leo loses the ball inside his own 30 and Souths have a chance to take the lead. Siegwalt pulls past Howarth but he's just held up by the cover.
But two plays later Souths strip the Melbourne left side for numbers easily and Johnston cuts inside Hughes to score and put the Rabbitohs back up.
Ward takes over the goal-kicking but he misses. Souths lead 18-16.
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 9:19pm
52' Souths nearly get another
Walker puts Johnston away down the left, he has Dufty in support but his pass inside is ruled forward! Souths let a chance go begging.
Key Event
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 9:17pm
51' Smith gets the cheese for Souths
A set restart puts the Rabbitohs on the attack and some nice offloading puts Fletcher away. Another restart helps them build pressure and Smith punches his way over from dummy half!
They needed that, Souths. It'd been a lean few sets for them and maybe this can spark them.
Siegwalt converts from in front and it's back to 16-14.
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 9:06pm
Second half is underway
And we're halfway home, Souths kick us off.
Key Event
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 9:00pm
Match report: Knights pay heavy price for loss to Roosters
A Daly Cherry-Evans match-clinching field goal and a treble from James Tedesco have propelled the Sydney Roosters to a thrilling 23-22 win over an injury-smashed Newcastle.
In one of the games of the season, the host Knghts were brave throughout, while losing Origin backrower Dylan Lucas to a dislocated and suspected broken left ankle in the first period, and star half Dylan Brown to a worrying knee injury early in the second.
If the title favourites Penrith have wobbled over the weeks around State of Origin, the high-flying Roosters have been building, and Friday night's win was their fifth in a row - the competition's best record in that period.
Tedesco was brilliant for the victors in a wonderful return from the Origin series and concussion.
Newcastle, who were already without injured skipper Kalyn Ponga, have now lost their last three games and remain sixth on the ladder.
That streak aside, they were in this match right until the dying stages and will not be overawed come the big games in September.
The game started at breakneck speed worthy of a finals match, and it took 15 minutes for Tedesco to open the scoring with a brilliant stepping try through the heart of the Newcastle defence.
The Knights bounced back within 10 minutes when Francis Manuleleua, who was immense for his side, burst onto a peach of a Brown pass 30 metres out to power over for his first NRL try.
Undeterred by the injury to Lucas, Newcastle took the lead approaching the half hour mark when hulking middle forward Mat Croker pushed off Tedesco and Reece Robson to score.
The Knights then dominated possession in the next 10 minutes and led 10-6 at the break.
The second term began with more drama when Egan Butcher was placed on report for a shoulder to the head of Manuleleua, who was forced from the field for a head injury assessment.
Tedesco had a double shortly after but when Sam Walker missed the conversion things were all locked up.
Nat Butcher joined his brother on report when an errant swinging arm caught Tyson Frizell on the nose, sending the veteran for a HIA.
Newcastle responded again, Fletcher Hunt sending Dom Young over as the momentum see-sawed once more before Brown's injury, only for Tedesco to nab his third try, backing up a break from Nat Butcher.
Billy Smith put the Roosters in front in the 68th minute but the Knights would not go away and when Manuleleua again burst into the backfield before unleashing Bradman Best, the scores were level with six minutes remaining.
Enter the game's most clutch field goal kicker to seal the win as veteran Cherry-Evans kicked the 31st field goal of his career in the 77th minute.
The Roosters weren't without their injury woes either, losing Egan Butcher with a calf problem and Daniel Tupou with a shoulder complaint in the second half.
AAP
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 8:51pm
Halftime: Storm 16 lead Rabbitohs 8
Crazy old half, Souths had all the running early but Melbourne managed to pull them back despite losing Grant along the way.
Key Event
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 8:49pm
38' Fa'alogo scores a screamer
Goddamn. Fa'alogo takes a hit up around his own 30, pulls through two defenders and gets into the clear.
He takes on Dufty and absolutely carves him up like a Christmas ham. Holy hell, that was some solo try from the Storm fullback!
Wishart nudges it over and it's 16-8 Storm.
Fri 24 Jul 2026 at 8:46pm
Injury: Harry Grant
The Melbourne hooker is calling to the sidelines, he's pinged his hamstring and it's hard to see him coming back tonight.
The game turned when he came on, will it turn again now?