In short:
Students at Wesley College in South Perth have been suspended after they sent antisemitic messages and memes in a private group chat which targeted another student.
The college has not revealed how many students were involved but said it acted immediately to address the matter with the students and families involved.
Earlier this year, Wesley College ranked as the top private school in the nation, including for student wellbeing and academic excellence, according to an evaluation from data platform Schools360.
Students at a prestigious Perth private school have been suspended after they used "antisemitic language and memes" in a private group chat, targeting another student.
A spokesperson for Wesley College, in South Perth, confirmed an "incident" occurred but wouldn't be drawn on how many children had been suspended.
"An incident did occur involving antisemitic language and memes shared by a small group in a private group chat," the school said in a statement.
"The college acted immediately. The students responsible were suspended and the matter was addressed directly with the students and families involved."
The college also provided a statement from the family of the targeted student.
"We are deeply disappointed that this matter has occurred and that it has become the subject of media reporting as we are entirely satisfied with the way in which Wesley College has handled this matter," the statement read.
"Furthermore it must be noted that the school was not advised of this issue by our son, but rather by concerned students.
"The family did not at any time contact any media outlet as they are aware of the belief that this will worsen an already difficult situation.
"Our greatest concern is the welfare of our son."
The family has asked for privacy and said they wished to move forward.
Wesley College is associated with the Uniting Church, and has 1,300 students from pre-kindergarten to Year 12, according to its website.
It is a co-educational school until Year 6, and boys-only to Year 12.
Earlier this year, Wesley College ranked as the top private school in the nation, according to an evaluation from data platform Schools360.
The platform used academic excellence, student wellbeing, learning platforms, learning environment and institutional excellence as its assessment framework, giving the college a score of 93.3 per cent.
Not only incident in schools
Jewish Community Council of WA vice-president Steve Lieblich said he did not have details of the incident beyond what the college released, but it was not the only antisemitic incident he was aware of in schools.
"If it is the case that some students were harassing a Jewish student via social media using memes and messages, then obviously that's not on. That's really intimidating behaviour and we need to stamp that out," he said.
"It's not an isolated incident, we've had reports of incidents in other schools of both teachers and students engaging in antisemitic behaviour."
Mr Lieblich said antisemitism was worse in other states because WA authorities such as the education department and police were responding well to the issue.
"In Western Australia we've had the same proportion of increase in reported antisemitic incidents before the end of [2023], but we're working from a much lower base in WA," he said.
"The situation is better because people respond and because there are consequences to these sorts of behaviour."
Mr Lieblich reminded Jewish students and parents of students that they could talk to the Community Security Group, aimed at protecting WA's Jewish community, if they felt the need to.
Premier condemns incident
Premier Roger Cook said antisemitic behaviour was unacceptable.
"I hope that the school takes every action necessary to ensure that the school continues to provide a safe and peaceful community for its students," he said.
"Western Australia is a peaceful place, it is an inclusive society, and we want to make sure that everyone can live here in peace, I strongly condemn these allegations in the strongest possible terms."
The suspensions came as the Royal Commission into Antisemitism and Social Cohesion, being held in Sydney and Melbourne, examined the wider issue of antisemitism in Australia.
In late July, Special Envoy to Combat Antisemitism Jillian Segal told the Royal Commission there were anecdotal examples of antisemitism in classrooms, including references to gas chambers, and reports of chairs and tables being arranged in the shape of swastikas.
She said an independent organisation had been established to provide educational training aimed at combating antisemitism.