Commonwealth Games updates: 'Disappointed' but 'OK' Kennedy snags silver, cyclists continue dominance
Olympic pole vault champion Nina Kennedy could not defend her Commonwealth Games title against New Zealand's Eliza McCartney in a huge upset on day eighth of the Glasgow Games.
Kennedy missed gold on a countback and had to settle for silver in Glasgow.
The Australian flag bearer had one miss at 4.65 metres before clearing on the second attempt.
The difference was New Zealand's McCartney, who also cleared 4.65m, did not miss a height before missing three times at 4.70m.
"I'm disappointed. I wanted to win, and I didn't, and that's OK, you know," Kennedy said.
"I'm superhuman most of the time, but I'm also human a lot of the time. I make mistakes, and that's OK."
McCartney held the Oceania record with 4.94m until Kennedy broke it by clearing 4.95m in Monaco last month.
It was the fifth-best height on the all-time list and best in the world for the past five years, and had Kennedy eyeing the five-metre mark.
But the 29-year-old conceded she didn't handle the cold conditions well at Scotstoun Stadium.
"I don't think I've jumped that low in like four years, and I think that just demonstrates how tough it was," Kennedy said.
"I know I'm in better shape than that, and I'm excited for the rest of the season.
"But ... the Comm Games, it's just so much fun.
"I know this sounds silly, but sometimes sport is more than just the medals. It's about the memories made and the connections."
Elsewhere on the track, Lachie Kennedy and Torrie Lewis were unable to repeat their 100m medal magic in their respective 200m finals, both finishing sixth.
Earlier, Isaac Beacroft won gold in the men's 10,000m race walk before Sarah Billings dug in to take bronze in the women's 800m, sharing the podium with a pair of world champions.
Billings was the first Australian woman to win a medal in the 800m since Sharon Stewart claimed bronze in 1990.
Baker enters elite cycling company
Georgia Baker has won her fifth Commonwealth Games gold medal, joining a select group as Australia enjoyed another prolific day at the velodrome.
Outstanding team work set the Tasmanian up for the win on Saturday morning in the women's scratch race - her fifth Games gold.
After three gold in Birmingham and another in the team pursuit on day one of track cycling in Glasgow, Baker has joined esteemed company.
Anna Meares, Matt Glaetzer and Brad McGee are the fellow members of Australia's five cycling gold club.
And with the points race and elimination to come over the next two days, the 32-year-old could be out on her own.
"You never know - could be," Baker said with a grin.
Baker did not know about the pending milestone until fellow Australian cyclist and good friend Alex Manly messaged her before the scratch race.
"I was like, wow, I didn't realise that statistic. It's very good company and it's an honour to be in that list,"
"Just to be alongside [them] is great."
Fellow team pursuit gold medallists Sophie Edwards and Alyssa Polites were faultless, and when Polites gave the leadout with two laps left, Baker held on for the win.
"That was our dream run," Baker said.
"I was definitely wanting the finish line to come, that's for sure. I'm so happy."
After three gold on day one, Australia racked up three more wins to dominate the track cycling program.
The faultless execution in the scratch race was also a morale boost for the track endurance women after the frustrating and confusing start to day two.
Teammate Felicity Wilson-Haffenden was disqualified from her individual pursuit bronze medal ride because of her shoulder strapping.
While Edwards was also disqualified because of too much padding in her helmet, it was the Wilson-Haffenden ruling that concerned the Australians.
Not only did it deny their rider a shot at another medal after the team pursuit gold, but team management said there was no explanation from the race judges.
Also setting aside their loss to England in the men's team pursuit Ashes final the day before, Oliver Bleddyn led an Australian sweep of the individual pursuit.
He beat Conor Leahy in the final and James Moriarty won the bronze ride-off.
The fourth rider from the team pursuit, Blake Agnoletto, then stormed past brave Scottish rider Mark Stewart to win the elimination race.
While Australia had half the six-rider field in the men's keirin final, Malaysian great Azizul Awang has forgotten more about the event than Leigh Hoffman, Danny Barber and Tayte Ryan know.
Awang, who has strong Australian connections, rode brilliantly to win gold ahead of Hoffman.
In a mark of respect to the rider known as Pocket Rocketman, Hoffman and English bronze medallist Harry Ledingham-Horn put Awang on their shoulders after the medal ceremony.
"Azizul is just an inspiration. To lose to him, he's a great of the sport," Hoffman said.
"He knows how to ride a keirin better than anyone in the world."
Gordon Allan also claimed silver in the C2-C3 1km time trial amid another big day for Australia at the Sir Chris Hoy Velodrome.
"Australia has so much depth in every event. It's gold fever out here," Hoffman said.
See how the day unfolded in our blog below.
AAP
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Recap
Here are the gold medals won by Australia today:
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 8:35am
We're going to wrap it up there folks
Thanks a bunch for being here and reading along today!
We'll be back later this evening as the penultimate day of the Games begins.
We'll see you then.
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 8:15am
Athletics: Lewis happy with her Games
Torrie Lewis wasn't able to jag a second medal of these Games tonight (she'll have another chance yet in the realy). But she was feeling happy after her sixth place in the 200m final.
"If you would have told me at the start of this competition would I be happy with sixth I would've said absolutely," she said.
"I think the 100m just put my expectations even higher of myself. So I just need to remind myself that it was a big goal of mine to even make this final, so I'm still happy with that."
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 8:05am
Some more from Nina Kennedy
It's a bit of a weird feeling for Nina Kennedy, who won a silver medal on a countback in very very tough conditions, to be explaining what went wrong.
She spoke to 7 Sport after her event to explain what she faced out on the track today:
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 7:51am
A look at the medal table
Four fresh gold medals to add to the tally on day eight of the Games!
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 7:37am
Athletics: What a finish in the walk
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 7:21am
Sport is pretty darn great
I am loving the whole happy and friendly games. How wonderful is it, in this miserable world, right now. After FIFA it is so uplifting.
- Sherrie
I had a lot of fun with the World Cup Sherrie (how could you not watching Cabo Verde?) but you're spot on about the spirit of these Games!
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 7:08am
Boxing: Aussie through to gold medal fight
Australian Emma-Sue Greentree has progressed to the women's 75kg boxing gold medal fight.
She defeated England's Mary Kate Smith on a points decision, and isn't she pumped!
Rightfully so.
She'll take on Lovlina Borgohain in tomorrow's final, with fellow Aussies Jacob Cassar and Jye Dixon also set to go for gold.
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 7:07am
Athletics: Sri Lanka breaks drought with jav gold
Sri Lanka has won its first athletics gold medal since 1950, with Rumesh Tharanga Pathirage triumphing in the men's javelin final.
Pathirage seized the gold with a best throw of 89.75m.
He beat a hot field, with India's 2020 Olympic champion Neeraj Chopra taking silver with 85.83m.
Another Indian, Yash Singh, came away with the bronze via an effort of 85.41m.
Australia's Cameron McEntyrethrew 72.34m to finish in 11th place.
Key Event
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 7:01am
Athletics: Kennedy 'disappointed' but 'that's OK'
Look it's fair to say that Nina Kennedy was carrying some pretty massive expectations heading into the women's pole vault.
She carried the flag to lead the Australian team into these games, and was a massive, massive favourite to defend her gold medal.
Kennedy still walked away with silver in extremely tough conditions. It was very windy and very cold at Scotstoun Stadium.
"Of course I'm disappointed, I wanted to win and I didn't. I'm superhuman most of the time but I'm also human most of the time and I make mistakes and that's OK," Kennedy told the ABC.
"I'm a really good hot weather jumper but clearly I'm not a very good cold weather jumper. That amazing tailwind the sprinters have been getting that's been a complete crosswind for us.
"It was so cold out there but that's part of it. Eliza handled the conditions better and that's why she's walking away with a gold medal."
Key Event
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 6:52am
Athletics: Lewis sixth in 200m final
Australia's Torrie Lewis has finished outside the medals in the women's 200m final.
Lewis was sixth in a time of 22.88 (+1.7 wind).
Adaejah Hodge of British Virgin Islands won gold in 22.07.
Shaniqua Bascombe of Trinidad and Tobago finished with the silver via a time of 22.35.
Jamaica's Alana Reid rounded out the medals with a time of 22.56.
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 6:34am
Athletics: Lewis chasing second medal
Torrie Lewis is up soon in the women's 200m final.
Lewis won her semi and has drawn lane seven for the medal race.
She already has a bronze from the 100m.
Australia has a proud record in the women's 200m, having won gold on 10 occasions.
Nova Peris was the most recent Australian gold medallist in the 200m, claiming victory at the 1998 Kuala Lumpur Games.
Lauren Hewitt was the last Aussie to reach the podium, finishing third in Manchester 24 years ago.
The final is scheduled for 6:46am AEST.
Key Event
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 6:29am
🥈🥉Silver and bronze to Australia in long jump T38!
Great news in the women's long jump T38 final, with Layla Sharp and Ayla Kowalczyk wining silver and bronze respectively.
Sharp produced a PB of 5.06m to finish second behind Olivia Breen (5.09m) of Wales.
Kowalczyk picked up the bronze on countback with a leap of 4.71m, which was a PB.
The third Australian, Sienna Newton, was fifth with 4.70m.
Key Event
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 6:26am
Athletics: Kennedy sixth in 200m final
Lachlan Kennedy has finished sixth in the men's 200m final, running 20.41 (+1.7 wind).
South Africa's Sinesipho Dambile won gold in 19.96.
Nigeria's Udodi Onwuzurike finished in 20.09 for the silver, with Jamaican Christopher Taylor posting 20.11 for the bronze.
Kennedy ran a brilliant bend but was overpowered in the straight.
A superb Glasgow campaign for the Queenslander!
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 6:18am
Athletics: Kennedy looking to snap 76-year drought
The men's 200m final is almost upon us.
Lachie Kennedy will be flying the Australian flag, running out of lane one.
He is looking to reach the podium for the second time these Games after claiming silver in the 100m.
Should Kennedy win a medal, it will be the first time since 1950 an Australian has finished in the top three in the men's 200m/220yards.
The great John Treloar won gold in the 220 yards 76 years ago in Auckland, with Australian teammate David Johnson collecting silver.
The final is scheduled for 6:25am AEST.
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 5:58am
Athletics: Aussie Carli sixth in 400m hurdles final
Australia's Sarah Carli placed sixth in the women's 400m hurdles final.
Carli ran a time of 55.85.
Jamaica's Sanique Walker added to her country's proud history in the event, winning gold in a PB of 54.00.
Key Event
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 5:49am
🥈Athletics: Kennedy finishes with silver!
Nina Kennedy has to settle for silver after being eliminated from the women's pole vault final.
She missed her three attempts at 4.70m.
New Zealand's Eliza McCartney won the gold medal.
McCartney and Kennedy both finished with successful clearances of 4.65m.
But McCartney had fewer misses during the final, which meant she will stand on top the podium.
McCartney's teammate Imogen Ayris (4.55m) took the bronze.
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 5:40am
Athletics: Kennedy misses second shot at 4.70m
Nina Kennedy has missed her first two attempts at 4.70m.
She needs a clearance on her third, otherwise she will be eliminated from the final.
New Zealand's Eliza McCartney is yet to clear the height.
McCartney's teammate Imogen Ayris has bowed out of the final after missing three straight attempts.
She claims the bronze with 4.55m.
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 5:36am
Athletics: Nina Kennedy in action
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 5:35am
Bowls: Aussies men go down to Northern Ireland
Not the result the Australian men's pair of Corey Wedlock and Aaron Teys wanted.
They've gone down to Northern Ireland in a classic, and their hopes of group-stage progression have taken a massive hit in the process.
Northern Ireland dominated the first set 7-2, but the Aussies fought back early in the second, taking a 5-1 lead into the final end.
But a clutch final shot from the Northern Irish earned them victory, lifting them clear at the top of the section standings.
With only the top team from each group advancing, it means the second-placed Aussies will have to hope for an Irish slip up if they are to make the semis.
Sat 1 Aug 2026 at 5:32am
Athletics: Kennedy clears 4.65m
Nina Kennedy got over 4.65m on her second attempt.
But the Olympic champion missed on her first crack at 4.70m.
Eliza McCartney also cleared 4.65m, while her New Zealand teammate Imogen Ayris passed after missing her first attempt at the height.