In short:
The first report into the Northern Territory's trial of legalising pepper spray for personal use has been released.
The latest data shows more than 5,000 cans have been sold since the start of the trial, and 69 have been confiscated by police.
The report found while there were no widespread community concerns around the trial, there was a need for more information for the public.
More than a year after it was legalised, data on the personal use of pepper spray across the Northern Territory has found 3,714 people have bought the product so far, with 46 prohibited buyers identified and three non-lawful deployments recorded.
Since September 2025, NT residents have been able to buy and use pepper spray, or oleoresin capsicum (OC) spray, for personal protection, in a trial implemented by the NT government.
The trial was due to finish at the end of August but has been extended until December 31.
A community reference group (CRG) report reviewing the trial's first 12 months has now been submitted to the chief minister's department. It uses data from the NT Police Force, which has also provided the ABC with figures up to date as of this week.
The data shows a total of 5,882 canisters have been sold to 3,714 people in the NT since the trial began, and 69 cans have been seized by NT Police.
An NT Police Force spokesperson said since the trial began, there had been nine reported uses of OC spray, three of which were not in self-defence.
They said one of those instances had led to charges for the for unlawful use of OC spray.
According to the CRG report, eight people have been charged with making a false declaration or unlawful possession of OC spray since the start of the trial.
To be eligible to purchase OC spray under the trial, a person must be over 18, and declare no relevant criminal history, police or court orders.
The CRG report said it "did not identify any significant or widespread community concerns" about the trial in its first 12 months.
However, it said there was a "need for clear, accessible and consistent public information", particularly around storage and transport of the product, and noted some people "who had previously carried improvised items for self-defence ... had instead transitioned to carrying OC spray".
Superintendent Ian Kennon said police were "currently happy" with the trial.
"Over 98 per cent of people purchasing OC spray having done so in alignment to the conditions of the trial," he said.
"We continue to urge everyone who legally purchases OC spray to familiarise themselves with their legal use."
Aside from Western Australia, NT is the only jurisdiction in the country where it is legal for members of the public to buy and use pepper spray.
The start of the NT trial faced community criticism, with more than 20 prominent organisations signing an open letter to the NT government warning its legalisation "risks escalating violent incidents".
Buyers mostly women, retailer says
Warren Smith, a local outdoor and fishing retailer, said he had sold at least 1,000 canisters of OC spray from his shop in the Darwin CBD.
"Ever since it came out, the most people that buy it, would be females," he said.
"I'd say anywhere from 20s, mid-20s, right up to 60s, that would be the main group that buy it.
"Most people, the ladies, say it's just to make them feel safe, when they go for a walk of the evening, or the morning."
Mr Smith said he believed the trial should become permanent, "if it makes people feel safe and it's something they can feel protected with".
OC spray used in recent incident
Just last month, a worker at a business in Palmerston deployed OC spray after she was allegedly assaulted.
Police allege a 34-year-old woman was throwing items in the store, and an accompanying 17-year-old physically assaulted the worker.
After they left the store, the worker allegedly followed them outside and deployed OC spray through the driver's side of the vehicle they were in.
The 17-year-old and the 34-year-old have since been charged over the alleged assaults.
A police spokesperson said the use of OC spray during the incident was still under investigation.