In short:
A man who murdered his Canberra colleague in a 2023 stabbing attack is appealing against his 30-year sentence.
Lawyers for Jude Wijesinghe, who murdered Tshewang Choden, argue his accepted mental impairment at the time of the murder should have translated to a reduced sentence.
What's next?
A decision on the appeal will be handed down at a later date.
A chef sentenced to 30 years in jail for murdering his co-worker at Canberra's National Zoo and Aquarium is appealing against his sentence, arguing the court failed to properly account for his mental impairment when determining his punishment.
Warning: This story discusses a violent crime.
Jude Wijesinghe was handed a 30-year sentence and a 20-year non-parole period by the ACT Supreme Court in December last year, after he admitted to murdering his co-worker Tshewang Choden at the zoo in 2023.
The 32-year-old trapped Ms Choden in a storeroom and fatally stabbed her 14 times in what Chief Justice Lucy McCallum described as "murderous violence against a vulnerable woman at the hands of a jealous, possessive man".
It was one of the ACT's most significant sentences, with Chief Justice McCallum stopping short of imposing life in jail, after taking into account Wijesinghe's guilty plea and mental health at the time of the offending.
She found his mental illness provided "some explanation" for the murder and reduced his moral culpability, but did not warrant a reduction in the overall sentence given the "very serious objective features" of the offence.
Sentencing judge erred, defence argues
The ACT Court of Appeal heard submissions on Wednesday from Wijesinghe's defence barrister Kylie Weston-Scheuber, who argued the sentencing judge made four errors when determining the length of his sentence.
Ms Weston-Scheuber said Chief Justice McCallum accepted psychiatric evidence that Wijesinghe was suffering from a major depressive disorder and pathological infatuation with Ms Choden, but "expressly failed to give any reduction" to the head sentence.
She argued that, having found his mental illness reduced his moral culpability, the court ought to have reduced the overall sentence.
"Her Honour failed to distinguish between a person who is motivated by a desire to possess someone or take revenge without the effects of that mental impairment, where in this situation that emotional state and motivation was produced by that mental impairment,"Ms Weston-Scheuber said.
She also argued the sentencing judge erred in finding Wijesinghe's mental impairment did not reduce the objective seriousness of the offending, despite accepting it was causally linked to the murder.
Counsel for the Director of Public Prosecutions, Elizabeth Ruddle SC, who is seeking to have the original sentence maintained, argued an offender's moral culpability and the objective seriousness of the offending were separate considerations in sentencing.
She argued Chief Justice McCallum was entitled to find Wijesinghe's mental illness reduced his moral culpability without also reducing the objective seriousness of the murder.
"Let's not forget how horrific this murder was. The deceased was trapped in this room knowing she was going to die,"counsel said.
Ms Ruddle said the court's assessment of objective seriousness was based on the actual features of the offending.
"That's what the court needs to look at: the actual features of the offence," she said.
Ms Ruddle also argued that even if Wijesinghe's mental illness reduced his moral culpability, the sentence still needed to reflect the seriousness of the offending and discourage similar crimes.
Ms Weston-Scheuber also argued Chief Justice McCallum erred by failing to reduce the head sentence to reflect Wijesinghe's guilty plea and that the overall sentence was manifestly excessive.
Ms Ruddle rejected both grounds, submitting it was open to the sentencing judge to recognise the guilty plea through the non-parole period and that the 30-year sentence remained within the available sentencing range.
The appeal sits before Justice Darryl Rangiah, Justice Andrew Muller, and Justice Jon White, with a decision to be handed down at a later date.