In short:
The Coalition has unveiled its plan for "root and branch" educational reform, which would remove cross-curricular units on Indigenous history and Asian studies.
Students would instead learn more about Western values, including civics, literature, and philosophy.
What next:
The Coalition would also "streamline pathways" for future teachers to address shortages.
The Coalition has unveiled its plan for "root and branch" reform of Australia's education system, that would include subjects on "Western values", and less time spent on Indigenous history.
Speaking in Sydney's west, Shadow Education Minister Julian Leeser said the reforms would also see the Australian flag flown in all schools to foster more national pride.
He declared that the Coalition's policy would "restore excellence" in education, amid plummeting academic standards.
"Our academic performance is worse than ever. Our boys are disengaged and falling behind, our classrooms are disrupted and, in some cases, dangerous," Mr Leeser said.
To address rising classroom disruption, Mr Leeser floated the idea of teaching pathways for military veterans.
"When I think about the need for better classroom behaviour and more discipline in our classrooms, and the need for more support for Australian values, it seems to make sense,"
Make Indigenous history 'discrete' subject
Mr Leeser, who is also the shadow minister for Indigenous Australians, said children should learn about Indigenous heritage, "just like they learn about our British foundation and multicultural character".
Advocating for a shorter national curriculum that "returns time to teachers", he said the Coalition would remove cross-curricular priorities - which are areas of learning embedded across the curriculum, rather than as separate subjects.
These include Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander histories and culture, Asia and Australia's engagement with Asia, and sustainability.
"All three topics are important ... but that doesn't mean they should be delivered thematically to our children as cross-curricular priorities," he said.
"Teach them as discrete, carefully planned topics that fit properly within geography or history or science classes."
'Western values' to underpin curriculum
The Coalition's curriculum overhaul also calls for students to "specifically learn" about Western values and culture.
"That includes basics like democracy, the rule of law, a fair go, the development by Australians of our system of constitutional monarchy and federation,"
"But I would also like to see Australian students taught and exposed to ...classical works of literature, art, music and philosophy that underpin and enrich the ideas that have shaped our country."
The shadow minister said the Coalition's "root and branch" reforms would build a sense of national pride, which he said was lacking.
"Let every school have a flag and let every student take pride in it, its history and the values for which it stands."
Faster pathways for teachers
In addition to potentially streamlining teaching pathways for soldiers, a Coalition government would also slash qualification timelines.
Mr Leeser pledged a Coalition government would support a return to a one-year teacher accreditation system.
"Until the early 2010s, teachers in Australia were generally accredited on the basis of one-year teacher training courses," he said.
"In 2023, the NSW Productivity Commission released data showing that the shift to the longer qualification led to 9,000 teachers not entering the profession between 2015 and 2022."
The Coalition's policy would also include a framework to help all Australian schools develop "a clear statement of behavioural expectations" for students, amid rising instances of abuse towards teachers.