Veteran news anchor Richard Morecroft has died, aged 70.
Morecroft presented ABC's NSW 7pm news bulletin from 1983 to 2002.
Before moving to Sydney, Morecroft presented the ABC News SA bulletin.
He also hosted Letters and Numbers on SBS, as well as popular children's current affairs show Behind the News on ABC.
A spokesperson confirmed the death on Tuesday night, saying Morecroft had died "at a time of his choosing, on the south coast of NSW".
"He was diagnosed with cancer earlier this year and was grateful to go peacefully, with his partner of 36 years, Alison Mackay, beside him," they said in an Instagram post.
"We are devastated to lose such a warm, generous and caring human and hope that all those who knew him, if only through their TV screens, will remember him fondly."
Hundreds have paid tribute to Morecroft on social media, with Australian Story presenter Leigh Sales describing Morecroft as a "gentle man".
"He was pure class in every way," she said.
"I consider myself a lucky person indeed to have been his friend.
"I remember I started in the Sydney newsroom as a junior reporter ... and he went out of his way to welcome me ... touch base with me and to make sure that I was going OK.
"Just an absolutely divine human being."
'A big loss'
Sales said Morecroft had been a "reassuring presence in people's homes" for decades.
"He was full of life, he adored nature, he loved art, he loved people, he was just kind and caring, through and through," she said.
She said she saw Morecroft about a month ago when he was "dealing with bad news in a very stoic way and dignified manner".
"It's just a big loss," she said.
Loading...
Prime Minister Anthony Albanese described him as "a great Australian".
"As the face and the voice of the news of the ABC, Richard became a beloved part of Australian life," the prime minister said.
"Combining a consummate professionalism with an unyielding humanity, Richard was a figure of absolute trust, a warm and familiar presence who guided us through the good times and bad.
"He loved the arts and was deeply passionate about our natural environment. Nothing completed the picture so delightfully as the time we learned that he used to keep a baby flying fox safe and sound beneath the desk while he was presenting the news."
ABC managing director Hugh Marks said Morecroft was "one of the great broadcasters of his generation".
"His intelligence, warmth and professionalism, beamed into homes across Australia for almost two decades, made him a trusted presence in the lives of Australians and an enduring part of the ABC's history," he said in a statement.
"Our thoughts are with his family, friends and former colleagues."
ABC NSW 7pm News presenter Jeremy Fernandez said Morecroft was in person "as affable, generous, and clever as he appeared on-air".
"Richard was a model of how to wear success and popularity with grace and humility," he said.
"He didn't let the business of news and media dim his love and enthusiasm for people, art, the environment, and the world.
"I'm so deeply saddened by his passing."
'The newsreader's newsreader'
Former ABC News Breakfast presenter Michael Rowland said Morecroft was one of his role models.
"I looked up to him enormously," he said.
"He was the newsreader's newsreader.
"When he said something, you absolutely believed him because it was heartfelt and that was something that he took with him until his final days.
"You put Richard Morecroft in front of a TV camera, and you didn't have to worry because he was the voice of authority.
"Whether he was presenting a serious news bulletin or hosting a quiz show, he was the man."
ABC Radio Sydney listeners also paid tribute to the popular presenter, with one saying they grew up watching Morecroft on television.
"I love the way he presented the news," the listener said.
"What a great guy he was."