In short:
Australian authorities are investigating reports a soldier who previously served in the Australian Defence Force has been killed in Ukraine.
The soldier, known by the nickname "Mozzie", was serving as a combat medic with Ukraine's 1st Foreign Legion Squadron.
What's next?
Authorities in Australia and Ukraine are yet to confirm details about his death.
Australian officials are investigating reports a former ADF soldier has been killed while fighting in Ukraine.
The soldier, known by the nickname "Mozzie the Aussie", had been serving as a volunteer and combat medic in the Ukrainian International Legion's Med Team Alpha.
The ABC has been asked not to report his full name out of privacy concerns for his family, but has confirmed the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is making inquiries with authorities in Ukraine.
His death has not been confirmed by any Australian or Ukrainian officials, but veteran and Shadow Minister for Defence Personnel, Phil Thompson, paid tribute to the former Australian soldier on social media.
In a statement, Mr Thompson remembered his friend as someone "who earned the respect of all who served alongside him".
"He was the kind of bloke who never hesitated to put others before himself. He was a good man, a great soldier, and someone his mates could always rely on when it mattered most,"
"Through his courage, skill and selfless commitment to others, Mozzie saved countless lives on the battlefield.
"My thoughts are with Mozzie's family, friends, and brothers in the battalion in both Australia and Ukraine as they mourn this terrible loss."
Former soldier went to Ukraine to help
Mr Thompson said "Mozzie" served in the Australian Army and was a member of the Townsville-based 1st Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment.
He completed deployments to Papua New Guinea before travelling to fight in Ukraine.
In a video posted online by Med Team Alpha, a masked soldier identifying himself as "Mozzie from Australia" explained why he wanted to fight in Ukraine.
"I have a military background in Australia so a lot of the skills that I had wouldn't transfer over to other jobs," he said.
"So I thought Ukraine would be the perfect opportunity to help out the country as a whole and use my skills to a good use."
The Ukrainian Armed Forces has been contacted for comment.
According to Ukraine's Military Ombudsman, "around 16,000 foreign volunteers from at least 72 countries" are serving alongside Ukrainian forces.
In June, former ADF soldier Samuel Pedrazzini was killed while fighting on the front lines in Donetsk, in eastern Ukraine.
Melbourne man Oscar Jenkins, who was captured by Russian forces while serving in Ukraine's army in 2024, recently gave his first interview since being convicted in what the Australian government has slammed as a "sham trial".
Australian authorities say they have asked Ukraine to prioritise Jenkins in any future prisoner swap with Russia.