In short:
A man has pleaded not guilty to sexually assaulting a woman over nearly two decades in southern NSW.
Prosecutors allege the man filmed the abuse, with hours of footage set to be relied upon as evidence in an upcoming trial.
What's next?
The man has been granted conditional bail ahead of a two-week District Court trial scheduled for April 2027.
A southern NSW man is set to stand trial accused of filming himself raping and assaulting a woman over the course of nearly two decades.
The man, who cannot be named for legal reasons, is facing allegations he sexually assaulted the woman at various properties in the Snowy Mountains and the Riverina between 2007 and 2024.
The man, aged in his 60s, appeared before Sydney's Downing Centre District Court via audio-visual link on Wednesday, where he pleaded not guilty to 45 charges.
It took about 20 minutes for the court to read out each charge one-by-one, which included 32 counts of sexual intercourse without consent.
It is alleged most of the assaults took place at Adaminaby, as well as parts of the Riverina, including Gundagai.
Crown prosecutors allege the man made hours of recordings of the alleged abuse over 15 years, which the court heard would form part of their case in an upcoming criminal trial.
The man also pleaded not guilty to other charges including aggravated sexual assault while inflicting bodily harm, assault causing bodily harm, and acting with intent to influence a witness.
Concerns for jury
The court heard during Wednesday's arraignment hearing that the complainant in the matter had recently died, but the prosecution would still go ahead with the trial.
"All of the evidence is on video," crown prosecutor Katrina Mackenzie told the court.
Crown prosecutors said they would also rely on recorded statements from police interviews with the complainant.
Ms Mackenzie told the court that 12 hours of footage depicting the alleged assaults would be shown at the trial, but she had "mental health concerns" about a jury watching the recordings.
"If a jury was observing it [the recordings], we would need to take a lot of breaks," Ms Mackenzie told the court.
Defence lawyer Roland Keller agreed he too would "be asking for the jury to have a break" after watching relevant parts of the footage, which was recorded over 15 years.
Both parties agreed a judge-alone trial would be more suitable.
The legal teams are expected to formally apply for such at a hearing in August.
Justice Christoper O'Brien scheduled the two-week trial in the Queanbeyan District Court for April 2027.
The court heard that less than a dozen witnesses were expected to give evidence at next year's trial, including community members and police.
The accused man was also granted conditional bail on Wednesday, to stay at a property in the Riverina until the trial next year.