In short:
The Northern Territory Parliament has passed voluntary assisted dying (VAD) legislation in a conscience vote this evening.
The bill's passage brings the NT into line with the rest of Australia, meaning VAD is now legal throughout the country.
Almost all of the NT's parliamentarians were in favour of legalising VAD, though some introduced amendments to the bill that were ultimately rejected.
The Northern Territory Parliament has passed a bill legalising voluntary assisted dying (VAD) in the NT, with significant restrictions on accessing, and initiating conversations about, the practice.
The NT is now both the first and last Australian jurisdiction to legislate for VAD after a watershed 1995 law was overturned by the Commonwealth two years later.
A gag clause preventing medical professionals from starting conversations about VAD will remain in the legislation after government members voted down two attempts to remove it.
Recipients of VAD will be required to have an end-of-life prognosis no greater than 12 months before accessing the service, after proposed amendments to change the eligibility criteria were also rejected.
Several Country Liberal Party (CLP) backbenchers split from their government colleagues throughout the two days of debate, siding with the Labor Opposition and independent Member for Johnston Justine Davis in pushing for the gag clause and prognosis period to be amended.
"These are meaningful changes and if we're just obstinate about it, if we just dig our heads in the sand, I don't think you can really call this a 'Rights of the Terminally Ill' bill anymore," CLP Member for Fong Lim Tanzil Rahman said.
Member for Fannie Bay Laurie Zio also appealed to her CLP colleagues to consider the amendments, at one point reminding them they were not expected to vote along party lines.
"It is a conscience vote, nobody's going to get in trouble if you're voting one way or the other, please have a think about what your electorate wants,"
Attempts to remove the gag clause were ultimately rejected by a majority of government members, including Member for Blain Matthew Kerle, who had last week voiced support for the amendments.
Dr Rahman, Ms Zio and member for Karama Brian O'Gallagher all supported the changes, joined by independent Justine Davis and all participating Labor Opposition members but the bill still had enough support to pass unamended.
Labor Member for Gwoja Chansey Paech abstained from the debate.
An amendment to the 12-month prognosis period was also rejected by a majority of government members, including Mr O'Gallagher, despite the Member for Karama previously seeking to extend the time frame to two years.
Righting the 'greatest wrong'
The passage of the bill marks the second time voluntary assisted dying has been legislated in the Northern Territory, after the federal parliament moved to disallow the 1995 law.
Speaking outside parliament after tonight's debate, Chief Minister Lia Finocchiaro said the moment was a long time coming for Territorians who had been wronged by the Commonwealth.
"It's a very surreal moment," she said.
"I remember as a young girl watching this debate unfold, watching the news of Marshall [Perron] walking out of the parliament."
"Tonight we have righted the greatest wrong in delivering this important reform for Territorians."
Mrs Finocchiaro denied suggestions CLP members had been pressured into toeing the party line, despite all cabinet members and a majority of backbenchers voting in lockstep.
Labor Opposition Leader Selena Uibo said while it was disappointing the amendments were rejected, she was glad to see Territorians put on the same footing as the rest of the country.
"It's important Territorians know their voices have been heard," she said.
"While the bill has passed tonight, and I think many Territorians will absolutely welcome that, it has exposed even more division within the CLP government."
Gag order scrutinised
The NT joins South Australia as the only two Australian jurisdictions with a VAD gag clause, after Victoria's parliament removed a similar provision late last year.
Ms Uibo seized on a response to questions from other MLAs tonight in which Attorney-General Marie-Clare Boothby revealed the gag did not extend to administrative officers and receptionists.
"Effectively, [it] could be worked around and overridden if a GP has an administrative officer or an assistant who provides information to a patient," Ms Uibo said.
The back-and-forth also revealed the bill did not outline a clear means of enforcing the gag, with Dr Rahman saying it was "raising more questions than answers now".
As debate continued into the evening, MLAs including the CLP's Mr O'Gallagher said the clause undermined the work of doctors across the territory.
"It's not the doctor making the choice, the doctor is only discussing information," he said.
"If we can trust them to talk to families about the option of turning life support on and off, I'm sure I can trust them to have a good conversation with patients."
Supporters of the gag clause spoke with concern about its impacts for vulnerable Indigenous Territorians.
Health Minister and Minister for Aboriginal Affairs Steve Edgington said removing it ran the risk of causing fear and mistrust in remote communities.
Treasurer Bill Yan read from an email sent by former member for Mulka Yingiya Guyula in his contribution to the debate before resigning from parliament last week.
"If VAD is introduced to our communities and initiated by visiting nurses and doctors, there's a possibility many people will fear the clinics and blame the clinics for early deaths," he read.
Meanwhile, Labor Member for Daly Dheran Young argued for removing the clause after previously voicing concerns about how VAD may be received in Indigenous communities.
"I'm quite confident that removing the gag clause won't impede upon Aboriginal people in remote communities," he said.
The amendments were ultimately defeated by eight votes to 15.