Kangaroos deal major blow to Bulldogs' wildcard bid as AFL world reacts to Cats non-sanction over concussion saga
North Melbourne ends a seven-year drought against the Western Bulldogs, as the AFL's decision not to sanction Geelong over a concussion waiver leads to more questions than answers across the entire league.
Luke Davies-Uniacke finished with 31 disposals, 10 clearances and two goals, while Paul Curtis starred with four goals as the Kangaroos ran out 15.10 (100) to 11.11 (77) winners at Docklands Stadium.
The win was North's first against an opponent placed inside the top-eight in Alastair Clarkson's tenure, with the Kangaroos having lost 37 of 38 games against such opponents in the Clarkson era.
For the Bulldogs, the loss leaves them in a precarious position with two tough matches coming to wrap up the home and away season.
Outside of the Kangaroos-Bulldogs clash, there was widespread outrage across league circles on Thursday night over the AFL's controversial decision to not sanction the Cats.
Former Collingwood captain Tony Shaw said the decision not to penalise the Cats was "mind-boggling", labelling the club's decision to make a player sign a concussion waiver "morally deplorable".
Follow our live blog below for a recap of all of Thursday night's AFL action as it happened.
Submit a comment or question
Live updates
Western Bulldogs vs North Melbourne - final scoreboard
New: Filters
Choose what information you see below by using filters
Match report: North pull off upset win to extend Bulldogs' pain
North Melbourne has pulled off their best win of the Alastair Clarkson era, inflicting a costly 23-point defeat upon the Western Bulldogs at Docklands Stadium.
Challenged several times, after leading by as much as 28 points, the plucky Kangaroos held their nerve in a Thursday night thriller to beat the Bulldogs for the first time since 2019.
Inspired by forward Paul Curtis and midfielder Luke Davies-Uniacke (29 possessions, two goals), North won 15.10 (100) to 11.11 (77) to end a five-game losing streak.
Despite enjoying their best season in seven years, North was yet to beat an opponent above them on the ladder before facing the eighth-placed Bulldogs.
Unlike previous winnable games when they crumbled late, the Kangaroos fended off the desperate Bulldogs, led by captain Marcus Bontempelli and fellow star Ed Richards.
The Bulldogs, who missed the finals when they finished ninth under the previous system last year, face a precarious final fortnight of the home-and-away season.
A win against North would have guaranteed them a wildcard spot, at the very least, but they will need to beat in-form Carlton or Melbourne to be guaranteed of not missing the finals.
In a further concern for the Bulldogs, ruckman Tim English was in discomfort with his knee late in the final quarter and was assessed in the rooms.
North had to play with a man down for entire second half after defender Aidan Corr suffered issues with his back and was ruled out for the rest of the night.
The win for the Kangaroos was set-up by a exhilarating first quarter from Curtis - the fourth-highest rated quarter of his career - who kicked the opening two goals and brought down a mark of the year contender.
Curtis finished with a game-high four goals and 19 possessions to dominate opponent Michael Sellwood.
The stirring win comes at a crucial time for Clarkson, who has faced questions about his future coming towards the end of his fourth season in charge at North.
The four-time Hawthorn premiership coach is contracted until the end of the season, but a push for change could have come with a poor end to this campaign.
But this result will quieten that noise and ensure he starts 2027 coaching at Arden St.
AAP
Key Event
Beveridge says he would've signed a waiver as a player
Bulldogs coach Luke Beveridge is asked for his comments on the Geelong concussion saga.
While he says he doesn't have enough information to comment on Geelong specifically, he suggests he would've signed a waiver if it meant he could continue playing during his career.
Here's what Beveridge said on the Geelong waiver drama:
"I don't know anything about it, so it's difficult to have a view, it really is. It's hard to comment.
"I think every player wants to keep playing until your boots fall off, so it's an interesting discussion around liability and risk.
"All I know is if when I was playing and we all had concussions, and if I were to sign a waiver to keep playing, I would've. That's me personally back in the day.
"I'd like to think that historically and we're so careful with our players now and the way we train as far as duty of care goes, we really look after them.
"I don't know about that situation [Geelong] to speak on that situation."
The Bulldogs have an interesting case on their hands as well when it comes to the future of Tom Liberatore, who is out of contract and has a history of concussions.
Liberatore told Channel 7 pre-match that he needs to get through the rest of this season without another concussion to play on.
Here's what Beveridge said on Liberatore's future:
"His future doesn't hinge on concussion, but he's had a few.
"He's one that we've kept out for weeks on end to make sure he's really ready to come back and play. There's no way we'd rush a player back.
"A bit of water to go under the bridge over the next period of time, but you're always worried about players that have had a few [concussions]."
Is it a big club thing or a Geelong thing?
This Geelong attempt to write a dodgy contract is exactly the same as the Tippet saga that cost the Crows 4 x 1st-round draft picks. No sanction for a big Melbourne club. I wonder why interstate fans reckon the AFL is corrupt?
- Allen lyne
I hear what you're saying Allen, but this seems pretty Geelong specific.
For example, Carlton was raked over the coals over the Elijah Hollands debacle earlier this year and ended up being hit with a $75,000 fine.
It's baffling that it's been swept under the carpet here, and the rival clubs are said to be understandably furious.
That's before we even get to the point that the bloke in charge of the Cats at the time now works for the league. It's a horrible look, at best.
LDU's telling comment on Kangaroos list choices
An interesting little swipe from Luke Davies-Uniacke towards a few former teammates.
"It's bloody exciting the amount of talent that we've got around the club," he tells Fox Footy.
"It's been frustrating at times, no doubt.
"There's been times where I'm sitting after a 60-point, 100-point loss thinking, 'Where are we going here?', but we've had Clarko and Todd Viney come in and really gave that stability to the club, and to the list more importantly.
"We've got rid of blokes that we thought were letting us down and we brought guys in that were going to help us go forward."
Any guesses as to who he might be talking about?
What does this mean for the wildcard spots?
This result certainly has thrown the cat amongst the pigeons, word to Bill Lawry.
The Dogs could potentially be leapfrogged by the Magpies this weekend, if the Pies down the Eagles in Perth.
Carlton too, could draw to within four points of the Dogs and have a superior percentage as well.
They should still make it, but tonight was a chance to potentially get inside the top six. I'd say those hopes are extinguished now.
The Kangaroos are also alive and will be watching with a keen eye when the Saints and Blues meet on Sunday night in the round 22 finale. That one shapes as a potential eight-pointer.
The Kangaroos belt out the song in the rooms
Here are the final numbers from a big Kangaroos win
- Disposals: Kangaroos 418-351
- Inside 50s: Bulldogs 59-49
- Hit-Outs: Kangaroos 43-25
- Clearances: Kangaroos 42-33
- Centre Clearances: Kangaroos 16-9
- Contested Possessions: Kangaroos 139-132
- Marks: Kangaroos 109-67
- Marks Inside 50: Kangaroos 19-9
- Tackles: Kangaroos 64-61
- Tackles in Forward 50: Bulldogs 13-9
- One Percenters: Bulldogs 51-44
The Bont reacts to Bulldogs boilover
The awkward post-game interviews with the losing team continue on Channel 7 in what has been a quirk of this footy season.
Marcus Bontempelli is the player with the pleasure (derogatory) of doing so tonight.
"Hey Marcus, how does it feel to have potentially completely blown your finals chances mate?" says Mitch Cleary probably.
I wonder whether Channel 7 would rock up to interview someone who's just been fired from their job to get instant reactions. It'd make for sensational TV at the very least.
Points to the Kangaroos for singing their song
YESSSSS NORTH! Not my team but I love to hear only team that actually sings their song, singing their song. I wish more teams would dispense with the speed-chanting and belt out the actual melody like North do.
- Jenny
I agree Jenny, sing it loud and proud I reckon!
Sheezel says Wardlaw 'inspired everyone around Australia'
Talk about a wrap from your teammate! It really does feel like George Wardlaw is the spiritual leader of this bunch doesn't it?
It wouldn't surprise me in the slightest if he is the next skipper after Nick Larkey.
Clarko looks absolutely thrilled with this result
The vibes feel like the Kangaroos have won a final tonight!
I know people can laugh at a team celebrating a home and away game like this, but these are the types of milestones you need to celebrate along the way.
And trust me, when you've won as little as the Roos have over the last half-decade, every win is worth savouring.
Alastair Clarkson beaming as he shares hugs with every player in sight.
Key Event
FT: North Melbourne 15.10 (100) defeats Western Bulldogs 11.11 (77)
Luke Parker drills a set shot after the siren from a tough, tough angle and turns to the crowd and pulls out the Jude Bellingham!
What a performance, what a win for the Kangaroos! They've finally got their top-eight win under Alastair Clarkson.
This is their first win over the Bulldogs since 2019, a quite remarkable drought comes to an end.
The Kangaroos fans in the stands are going absolutely haywire.
Ex-Bulldog Caleb Daniel ends the match as the leading ball-winner with 33 touches, while Luke Davies-Uniacke was outstanding with 31 touches, 11 score involvements, 10 clearances, 10 tackles, six inside 50s and two goals.
Paul Curtis was unbelievable up forward as well with 4.0 to go along with 19 touches.
And then a word to George Wardlaw, whose return absolutely ignited this side. He finishes with 19 touches, seven score involvements and six clearances from just 57 per cent game time.
The Kangaroos need to get him properly fit because he could be an absolute monster.
Comben traps Jones in a huge tackle
Arty Jones races through a contest at a rate of knots inside 50, but he's stopped dead in his tracks by a wonderful Charlie Comben tackle.
Just a minute to go now, the Kangaroos are home folks.
Two minutes remaining
Surely not enough time now!
The Dogs have the ball locked in their half of the ground and they're throwing the kitchen sink at the Roos.
North leading by 17 points after another rushed behind to the Dogs.
Banch seals the deal for the Kangaroos!
Zac Banch drills a set shot from 35m out on a slight angle and I think that might be curtains folks!
Kangaroos lead by 18 points with three and a half minutes remaining.
Surely there's not enough time for the Dogs.
Five minutes to go!
A big blow for the Bulldogs as Tim English limps into the locker room after having his left leg landed on in a marking contest.
Tristan Xerri will be able to dominate the stoppages here.
Five minutes to go. The Kangaroos lead by two goals after a rushed behind.
Blamires misses a gettable set shot
Tom Blamires sprays a set shot from 35m out on a tough angle wide.
The Kangaroos lead by 13 points with six minutes left. That could end up being a crucial behind.
Khamis goes out on the full on set shot
A crucial miss from Buku Khamis, who is playing up forward here.
He outpoints two Kangaroos defenders to take a wonderful contested mark, but then kicks the ball out on the full from the set shot!
Eight minutes to go at Docklands
The clock is slowly becoming the Dogs' enemy here.
Still plenty of time, but they need a goal in the next couple of minutes here.