In short:
The WA government is considering building a new state-run gas-fired power plant as it prepares to switch off coal by 2030.
The state will not increase its reliance on gas despite the proposal, the government says.
A decision on the proposed gas plant project is expected by the end of this year.
The Western Australian government is investigating building and running a new gas-fired power plant in the south of Perth as it prepares to switch off coal by 2030.
The government has identified a site at Naval Base for a 300-megawatt (MW) power station that is expected to cost more than half a billion dollars.
WA Premier Roger Cook said his government was committed to being the "first and only state" to switch off "all our state-owned coal-fired power stations by 2030".
"A clean energy transition involves renewable energy, backed by battery and firmed by gas," he told reporters on Sunday.
"That's why we need to do careful planning; I stress at this stage we are just going to the community consultation and planning phase."
The state will not be increasing its reliance on gas, according to the WA government.
Mr Cook said this project, like the gas turbines at the Pinjar power station that was commissioned in 1989, would "replace existing assets that are coming to the end of their lives".
The energy needed to replace coal would come from renewables, including wind farms in the Mid-West, a government spokesperson said.
However, the state government has not put a price tag on the proposed project as it is still at an early stage.
This year, independent operator AGL stated it funded a similar 220-megawatt expansion at its Kwinana Swift Power Station for $450 million.
The ABC understands the state-owned project will be bigger and without existing infrastructure, with the cost expected to be higher.
A decision on the gas project is expected by the end of the year, as the state government is under pressure to meet its 2030 goals.
Bipartisan support
The project has rare bipartisan support, with the opposition suggesting it had the idea first.
"I do support this plan, because we built the exact same plan ... two years ago," said WA Liberal energy spokesman Steve Thomas.
But Mr Thomas said the proposed power plant needed to do more than just replace existing gas turbines, if coal was to be switched off.
"There is no way the government is closing down its coal fleet, on its current time frame, unless they have significantly more gas generation; that means they need new and additional gas, not just replacing old units," he told the ABC.
"They will need to have more than 300MW of new gas in total if they are going to keep the lights on past 2029."
He added that it would be "another failure of the transition plan" if the government was not putting more gas generation into the system.
"Some of the Pinjar units are due to retire in the mid-2030's, which means that this replacement is not really needed until then, which means in the meantime it is additional gas generation capacity."
The project will open to public consultation this week.