In short:
Thieves have stolen four paintings from the Renoir Museum in France, worth 9 million euros ($14.5 million).
The group broke into the museum in the early hours of the morning, stealing four artworks but dropping two as they fled.
What's next?
The museum remains closed while the thieves are being "actively sought", according to the local mayor.
Thieves have stolen two paintings from the Renoir Museum in France via a hole made in a garden fence.
The town's mayor, Bryan Masson, said a group of "well-equipped" and "well-informed" thieves broke into the museum dedicated to French impressionist painter Pierre-Auguste Renoir early on Tuesday, local time.
They sliced through a fence and entered the museum through the ground floor, then cut the clips securing the artwork frames, Mr Masson said.
The museum had 12 works by Renoir in total. Four were stolen, but two canvases were dropped during the police chase and found in the museum garden.
Local French newspaper Nice-Matin reported the paintings as Portrait of Madame Stephen Pichon (1895), Portrait of Madame Colonna Romano (1910), Coco Lisant (1905) and Jeune Fille au Puits (Young woman at the well, 1886).
The mayor confirmed Portrait of Madame Colonna Romano and Jeune Fille au Puits were the two artworks still missing.
Mr Masson's office estimated the value of the stolen works at 9 million euros ($14.5 million).
"Spotted thanks to the town's video surveillance cameras, the two individuals fled, abandoning one of the stolen paintings as they ran," Mr Masson said.
"The museum alarm went off at 5:48am. At 5:53am, just five minutes later, our municipal police were on the scene.
"Since this morning, both the municipal and national police have been deployed to the site.
"The perpetrators are being actively sought, and the investigation is ongoing."
The museum was closed on Tuesday while the investigation unfolded.
The Renoir Museum was opened in 1960 in the painter's last home before his death in 1919.
Its collection includes objects and furniture that belonged to Renoir, including his easel and wheelchair, as well as portraits, landscapes and nudes painted by the artist.
Spate of art heists in Europe
The theft comes less than a year after jewels valued at around 88 million euros ($141 million) were stolen during a daylight robbery from the Louvre in Paris.
The four suspected Louvre robbers have been arrested, but the stolen items still have not been found despite extensive searches by French investigators in the Paris region and exchanges with police in Belgium, Italy and beyond.
In August, three century-old paintings, including a Renoir, stolen by an organised gang from an Italian museum during a three-minute heist were recovered.
The artworks included Fish by Auguste Renoir, Paul Cézanne's Still Life with Cherries, and Odalisque on the Terrace by Henri Matisse.
Days after their recovery, another four paintings were stolen from another Italian museum.
Artworks by 15th century painter Antonello da Messina were taken from the Museo Regionale di Messina - the pieces some of the only surviving work by the Renaissance painter to have remained in his native city.
ABC/AFP/AP