In short:
Bosnian-Serb former general and convicted war criminal Ratko Mladic has died in prison at the age of 83.
Known as 'the Butcher of Bosnia', Mladic rose to power after Yugoslavia's disintegration in 1991 as the commander of the Bosnian-Serb army.
Mladic was convicted of genocide in 2016 for orchestrating the 1995 massacre of at least 8,000 Muslims in a UN-designated "safe area" of Bosnia.
Bosnian Serb general Ratko Mladic - who was was serving a life sentence for his role in the 1992-95 war in Bosnia - has died, a United Nations official has said.
The octogenarian former general, nicknamed "the Butcher of Bosnia", had been in ill health in the last few years and was hospitalised repeatedly. He had been in the UN detention centre since his arrest in 2011.
Mladic was convicted of genocide in 2016 for orchestrating the 1995 massacre of at least 8,000 Muslims in a UN-designated "safe area" of Bosnia, widely considered Europe's worst atrocity since World War II.
He was sentenced to life imprisonment in 2017.
According to his son, documents gave Mladic's date of birth at March 12, 1942, but he was actually born on March 8, 1943.
'Butcher of Bosnia'
The son of a World War II partisan fighter killed in 1945, Mladic was an officer in the old communist Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) when Yugoslavia's disintegration began in 1991.
When Bosnian Serbs rose in 1992 against Bosnia's Muslim-led secession, Mladic was picked to command the new Bosnian Serb army that swiftly overran 70 per cent of the landlocked country.
Dozens of towns were besieged with heavy weapons that once belonged to the JNA and villages were burned down as 22,000 troops of the UN Protection Force stood by more or less helplessly, with orders not to take sides.
The army Mladic created to fight in Bosnia was a model of ruthlessness, daring and brutality in the Serb warrior tradition - once prized in the life-or-death partisan struggle against the Nazi occupation of Yugoslavia in World War II.
In some of the most horrific examples, prisoners suffocated in the heat after being forced to eat salt and denied water, were starved and raped in prison camps, were made to jump off a bridge and shot, and were gunned down at night by the hundreds after being driven out of detention with chemical gas.
Mladic had a cameraman film the blitz on the encircled enclave of Srebrenica, to show him extolling his "lads" and haranguing Dutch UN peacekeepers who misguidedly accepted his solemn word that the inhabitants would be safe in his hands. Srebrenica supposedly had "safe area" status, meant to protect civilians from ethnic cleansing.
Mladic's forces were filmed handing out sweets to children, promising their safe passage. Meanwhile, thousands of men and boys were being readied for execution.
Mladic's capture took nearly two decades
A combination of Western pressure, covert American arms and training for Croats and Muslims gradually turned the tide against Mladic's army. Determined NATO strikes did the rest.
When NATO tried in 1995 to rein in his forces with the threat of limited air strikes, his troops defiantly seized UN peacekeepers as human shields - chaining them to likely targets.
In November 1996, Mladic and top generals gave in to strong Western pressure that he step down as ordered by Bosnian Serb President Biljana Plavsic, who succeeded Karadzic and was later jailed for her role in war crimes.
Despite Western appeals, the reformists ruling Serbia after Milosevic's fall did not dare move against a man who was a hero to a core of nationalist Serbs.
Mladic topped the wanted list for years at the UN International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), alongside Karadzic - also convicted of genocide.
Sporadic sightings put him at a Belgrade horse race or a soccer match. In 2004, NATO said he had toasted hard-drinking old comrades at his former bunker in Han Pijesak, Bosnia.
When he was finally arrested in 2011, he put up no resistance. His right arm was lame, the apparent result of an untreated stroke. He looked nothing like the burly general in camouflage who ruffled the hair of a Srebrenica boy in 1995.
He suffered a heart attack in 2013 and seemed older than his years. By his own account, he felt like a frail old man.
In his few court appearances, he wavered between self-pity, smiling defiance and vague distraction.
"I am a very sick man," Mladic pleaded to the court.
In 2019, Mladic told the judges that he was too ill to participate in outdoor exercises and requested leave to visit the graves of family members in Serbia. The request was denied.
His appeal against conviction was rejected in 2021, as were repeated requests for his release on compassionate grounds.
In August 2026, a UN doctor found Mladic's death "may occur at any time," possibly within weeks, but his application for release was again rejected as not in the interests of justice.
Reuters