Cameroon claimed their first Women's Africa Cup of Nations (WAFCON) title when they thumped surprise package Malawi 3-0 in the final, with Marie Ngah's first-half double helping seal victory on Sunday.
Cameroon had lost three finals but made it fourth-time lucky against a Malawi side making their debut at the continental championship. Ranked 153 in the world and 32nd on the African continent, Malawi had a fairytale run to the decider.
Recommended Stories
list of 4 items
- list 1 of 4Arsenal trounce Manchester City 3-0 in Community Shield masterclass
- list 2 of 4Arsenal defend title against revamped challengers as Premier League returns
- list 3 of 4La Liga: Five key talking points heading into Barcelona's 2026-27 season
- list 4 of 4La Liga: The key talking points for Real Madrid before the 2026-27 season
The two finalists had already sealed their place at the Women's World Cup in Brazil next year, along with fellow semifinalists Morocco and Algeria. The latter finished third after winning the bronze medal fixture on penalties on Saturday.
Under pressure, FIFA chief Gianni Infantino was all smiles as he handed the Indomitable Lionesses their medals in the presence of Confederation of African Football President Patrice Motsepe, with several players requesting photographs with the Swiss.
Infantino has long enjoyed the support of many on the African continent as he bids for re-election next March, despite revelations of his now-abandoned plans to sell a stake in future World Cups, which drew worldwide condemnation.
Cameroon dominated the first half and led 3-0 at the break after a superb performance against an outgunned Malawi.
Ngah reacted quickest to a loose ball in the box to give them the lead from close range after 20 minutes and they doubled the advantage on the half-hour mark as Naomi Eto added a second.
Malawi were clinging on and hoping to make it to halftime without any further damage but Ngah scored her second in the third minute of added time from Eto's pass.
Cameroon are the fourth different winners of the Women's Africa Cup of Nations since it was first played in 1998.
Nigeria have a record 10 titles, while Equatorial Guinea have two and South Africa one.