President Donald Trump says the United States is "hopefully toward the end" of its war with Iran, claiming that he has directly spoken to officials in Tehran, raising the prospect of renewed diplomacy even as fighting has erupted in Yemen.
However, there is still no confirmation from Tehran that direct negotiations with Washington have resumed. Just a day earlier, a senior Iranian official publicly rejected talks unless Iran's conditions were met. Tehran, which has, in effect, closed the Strait of Hormuz, has been demanding that the US honour the terms of the deal signed in June.
Recommended Stories
list of 3 items
- list 1 of 3Taiz camps overflow with Yemenis fleeing fighting after Houthi offensive
- list 2 of 3China willing to 'safeguard Iran's legitimate rights', official says
- list 3 of 3Iran war has cost the US $38bn: How will it impact US economy, politics?
Trump's comments come as the conflict has expanded into Yemen, putting increasing pressure on global energy supplies amid an Iran-imposed blockade of the strait through which a fifth of global oil and gas passes. Oil prices crossed $100 per barrel last week and continue to rise as Iran-linked Houthis have damaged Saudi oil installations amid renewed fighting.
So, what is the latest on the diplomatic front, and will the war end soon?
What is Trump saying?
"Well, hopefully we are toward the end of the war," he told reporters on Wednesday. "They want to make a deal. We'll see how that works out."
When asked by a reporter whether he had recently heard from the Iranian side, Trump said he had spoken with them "directly".
The comments come after Trump on Monday said he was open to talks, and added that Iran "wants to make a deal, quickly and badly" and that he would decide whether Washington would engage with Tehran.
However, Mohsen Rezaei, secretary of Iran's Supreme National Security Council, accused Trump of sending "mixed signals" and said "no talks until Iran's conditions are met".
Trump's claim that he has heard from Iran "directly" is significant because negotiations between Washington and Tehran have repeatedly depended on intermediaries, including Qatar, Pakistan and Oman. This is not the first time that Trump has claimed direct communication with Iran.
Former Iranian diplomat Abbas Khameyar dismissed Trump's claims. "I don't think there has been any additional effort beyond what was already under way in recent weeks," he told Al Jazeera.
There is a US narrative, he stated, "with tweets and statements by President Trump claiming that the Iranians are calling, pleading and asking for a meeting. But nobody believes this, and matters have not unfolded in that way."
He added that Iran's diplomatic activity has not moved beyond the framework already in place in recent weeks, centred on securing enforcement of the existing Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) rather than opening new negotiations.
What is the latest on the US-Iran diplomacy front?
On Thursday, Iran's semiofficial Tasnim news agency reported that Iran's Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi held a telephone call with Pakistani army chief Field Marshal Asim Munir, who has been leading the high-stakes diplomatic and mediation efforts between Washington and Tehran.
Araghchi held the phone call while still in Beijing, during which they discussed and consulted on the latest regional developments and issues of mutual interest, according to Tasnim.
A day earlier, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi called on the US and Iran to exercise restraint and "reopen the Strait of Hormuz at an early date", following his meeting with Araghchi in Beijing.
Araghchi, in a statement after the meeting, said that Tehran seeks "the restoration of calm to the region and friendly and peaceful relations with our neighbours".
"In this regard we have begun dialogue with the countries of the region," he added.
In a post on X, Araghchi described consultations with Chinese officials as "successful", saying Tehran values the strategic partnership it has built with Beijing.
"Today's decisions will decide the future strategic balance in the region, with immeasurable knock-on effects," Araghchi said on Thursday.
China has avoided direct involvement in the war, but President Xi Jinping, at the BRICS summit in New Delhi over the weekend, offered Beijing's willingness to play a role in peace efforts. He called on BRICS nations to advance peace in the Middle East.
Huiyao Wang, president of the Center For China and Globalization think tank in Beijing, says China's role in international affairs is increasing in importance during the current geopolitical turmoil.
"China has an enormous role to exercise if needed. So the mere fact that the two fighting parties have no end in sight shows the need for a big guarantor to come in ... I think the US wants to end this war and they also need China's help," Wang told Al Jazeera.
Meanwhile, US media outlet Axios is reporting that Trump is expected to meet Gulf leaders on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly next week to discuss the conflict, which has hugely affected oil exports from the Middle Eastern countries.
Diplomatic efforts have repeatedly stalled since a Pakistan-brokered MoU signed by Washington and Tehran collapsed last month, as the two sides accused each other of violating their commitments.
The MoU was supposed to kick-start a 60-day period for peace talks between the warring sides and included provisions for the reopening of the Strait of Hormuz, which has become a major flashpoint in the war.
Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian said earlier this month that Tehran would return to the agreement if Washington did the same.
What do we know about the Houthi meeting with US officials?
US officials met representatives of Yemen's Houthi movement at the US embassy in Muscat over the weekend, five sources told Reuters news agency. Oman helped organise the meeting.
The Houthis told US officials they did not intend to attack American vessels and remained committed to their 2025 ceasefire with Washington, according to two sources.
One source said they also pledged not to target Israeli or other commercial vessels, with the exception of Saudi ships.
The conflict had largely subsided in recent years after a 2022 ceasefire between the Saudi-backed government and the Iran-aligned Houthis, but reignited in July.
In recent weeks, the Houthis have seized Yemen's entire Red Sea coastline to cement their grip on the key Bab al-Mandeb strait - a vital maritime route connecting Asia with Europe - while declaring a blockade on Saudi shipping.
The strategic waterway is a critical maritime corridor linking the Red Sea with the Gulf of Aden and has become an alternative shipping route as the US war against Iran choked the Strait of Hormuz.