A Flydubai co-pilot accused of attacking the captain of a flight bound for Israel has been identified as an Omani national previously barred from flying in his home country over concerns about alleged extremist views, according to media reports.
There has been no official confirmation of the pilot's identity or his beliefs.
The United Arab Emirates on Saturday described Wednesday's incident on board Flight FZ1073 as an attempted "terrorist operation", saying the co-pilot attacked Captain Smit Machchhar, an Indian national, with an emergency axe and attempted to take control of the aircraft.
But investigators are still working to establish the motive and whether anyone else was connected to the attack, which has raised concerns about pilot vetting and aviation security.
Here is what we know:
What do we know about the accused pilot?
The co-pilot suspected of attacking the captain of the Dubai-Tel Aviv flight carrying 174 people has been identified as Hamam al-Hammami, an Omani national, three people with knowledge of the situation, including a Gulf diplomat and a Western diplomat, told AP news agency.
All spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorised to speak to the media. The Gulf diplomat said investigations are under way to establish whether he acted as a "lone wolf or had any connection with any extremist groups".
US media outlet CNN, quoting a source and an Israeli official, reported that al-Hammami is an Omani citizen who was born in the UAE to a Syrian mother and spent several years in the Emirates.
Questions have emerged about his previous aviation career and whether warning signs had been raised before he joined the Dubai-based low-cost carrier.
The Wall Street Journal, quoting unnamed sources, reported on Friday that Omani authorities had previously barred the accused co-pilot from flying in the country because of concerns that he had held extremist views.
Nevertheless, it remains unclear what those alleged views were or whether Oman informed other countries or airlines about its concerns.
CNN separately quoted a regional diplomatic source as saying that al-Hammami had been removed from flight training over similar concerns and was subsequently reassigned to another position.
The US-based network also reported that a LinkedIn profile bearing al-Hammami's name said he had spent seven years at Oman Air before leaving in February 2025. The profile said he joined Royal Air Maroc in June 2025 and left in January 2026.
It has now been confirmed that al-Hammami studied at a UK university.
In a statement to the Press Association, a spokesman for Buckinghamshire New University said: "Our thoughts are with the injured pilot, crew and passengers involved in this incident.
"Hamam al-Hammami previously completed a distance-learning course in aviation management. "He did not undertake any pilot training at the University."
What happened on flight FZ1073?
At 7:05am (03:05 GMT) on Wednesday, Flight FZ1073 departed Dubai for Tel Aviv, climbing to 34,000ft (more than 10,000 metres), according to Flightradar24. A little more than two hours later, it suddenly began to descend, plunging before rising and then descending again.
Flight-tracking data showed the plane plunging more than 17,000 feet in about two minutes, before climbing and descending again.
Meanwhile, a fight had begun in the cockpit between the two pilots. The co-pilot had attacked the Indian captain of the plane, Smit Machchhar, by stabbing him.
Machchhar later described finding himself seriously wounded on the cockpit floor as the aircraft descended.
"When I was down, I could feel that the aircraft was plummeting, and I knew this is the last chance to do something," he told Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi from a hospital in Abu Dhabi.
"I knew that the aircraft was going down ... I had fallen to the ground. I told myself that the door is right there, just open it. I managed to do it and people entered," he said.
Passengers and crew members entered the cabin and overpowered the co-pilot. The aircraft eventually levelled out at about 15,000 feet. Its transponder was subsequently switched to code 7500, signalling unlawful interference.
Two reserve pilots who were on board took control of the jet and landed it in Tabuk, northwestern Saudi Arabia. The plane landed safely at 9:45am (06:45 GMT) local time. Saudi authorities said both pilots were taken to hospital. They were later transferred to Abu Dhabi after being medically cleared.
What has the UAE said about the attack?
UAE Attorney General Hamad Saif al-Shamsi said on Saturday that investigators had determined that the co-pilot had begun carrying out what he described as a "terrorist act".
According to al-Shamsi, the co-pilot attacked the captain inside the cockpit using the aircraft's emergency crash axe and "attempted to take control of the aircraft's controls".
A crash axe is a tool kept in a cockpit to help pilots cut through the plane in emergencies.
On Thursday, al-Shamsi had ordered investigators to determine whether the incident was connected to "terrorist activity or intent" or involved prior planning or direction.
The UAE has not yet publicly established a motive or announced whether investigators believe al-Hammami acted alone.
UAE presidential adviser Anwar Gargash on Saturday said that the latest 'terrorist' attack is new warning that region's fight against extremism is not over.
"This underscores the importance of the UAE's early and firm stance: no tolerance for extremism and no leniency towards its rhetoric. Security begins with confronting hatred and drying up the sources of extremism," he posted on X
What is the latest in the investigation?
Abu Dhabi is now leading the investigation, with prosecutors examining the circumstances of the attack, its motive and any possible connections to others.
Previously, al-Shamsi said UAE judicial authorities have jurisdiction over the incident because the aircraft is registered in the UAE and flies under its flag, adding that UAE law applies to crimes committed on board "even if they occur outside the country's territory".
On Saturday, al-Shamsi said investigators are working "to uncover all the circumstances of the incident, its motives, and related connections, in addition to completing technical examinations and examining physical and digital evidence".
The final results will be announced as soon as the necessary procedures are completed, he said.
Meanwhile, Flydubai flights to Israel remain suspended amid the investigations.