North Korea has denounced major United States-South Korea military drills set to start next week as a provocation that heightens tensions on the Korean Peninsula.
The US-Japan-South Korea military cooperation is turning into a nuclear alliance, and North Korea will respond to a new level of threat with a new level of deterrent, a spokesperson for North Korea's Foreign Ministry said on Friday, according to Pyongyang's Korean Central News Agency (KCNA).
Recommended Stories
list of 3 items
- list 1 of 3North Korea's hackers using AI for attacks, cybersecurity firm says
- list 2 of 3N Korea launches ballistic missile as S Korea, US plan military drills
- list 3 of 3Why has North Korea fired a missile before US-South Korea drills?
Pyongyang routinely denounces military drills in the south as a provocation that heightens tensions.
The drills - named "Ulchi Freedom Shield" - are due to start on August 17 and will last until August 27. They will incorporate exercises to counter drones, GPS disruption, and cyberattacks as the US and its allies adapt to North Korea's evolving capabilities.
"The US announced that the forthcoming exercises are quite different from the ones of the past five years and intended to master the ability of fighting a war on the basis of the new aspects of modern warfare," the North Korean Foreign Ministry spokesperson said in the statement.
"It is our consistent principle of ensuring security to respond to a new level of a threat with a new level of a deterrent," the statement, published by KCNA, added.
Lessons learned in Russia-Ukraine
North Korea sent an estimated 12,000-15,000 soldiers to fight for Russia in its war against Ukraine, and the country is now thought to be preparing the deployment of another 10,000.
Thousands died, but the deal provided North Korea with valuable battlefield experience, as well as payment in arms, energy and direct financial support, according to reports.
Colonel Ryan Donald, spokesperson for the US and South Korean Combined Forces Command, said this week that North Korea's deployment to the European war had changed the threat his soldiers may face on the Korean Peninsula.
"They've taken those lessons they learned there and brought them back to North Korea," he told reporters. "Our training accounts for that threat."
Pyongyang's Foreign Ministry statement said the US-South Korea drills are being staged "at a time when military and political situation is becoming more serious with each passing day in Europe, the Middle East and other parts of the world".
North Korea also said on Friday that it would further strengthen its nuclear deterrence, accusing the US of lowering its threshold for nuclear weapons usage and pushing the world "to the brink of nuclear war".
On Wednesday, North Korea fired a ballistic missile towards the sea off the Korean Peninsula's east coast, just six days after firing another missile.
The Ulchi Freedom Shield drills will include 18,000 South Korean soldiers and counterparts from the 28,500-strong US contingent in the country.