A Lebanese woman has been killed, and several other people injured by Israeli strikes on the town of Arab Salim, in southern Lebanon's Nabatieh district.
Lebanon's Ministry of Health said six people were wounded in the attacks on Thursday, including a child, a woman and two elderly people, while the state-run National News Agency (NNA) reported that the woman who died "had been married for 48 hours".
Recommended Stories
list of 3 items
- list 1 of 3US-Iran MoU ends: What happens next?
- list 2 of 3US designates Hezbollah an Iranian proxy, sanctions funding network
- list 3 of 3World Bank projects war-hit Lebanon's economy to contract by 6.4 percent
The newlywed woman's house was also destroyed in the attack, NNA said.
Lebanese security sources said at least 10 Israeli strikes had been carried out in the wider Nabatieh area. NNA also reported artillery shelling targeting the outskirts of the town of Rashaf in the Bint Jbeil district.
The Israeli military claimed it was targeting Hezbollah after the Iran-backed group struck its soldiers in the south overnight. The army said it struck Hezbollah "weapon storage facilities".
"Israel targeted the town of Arab Salim in the Nabatieh governorate. It targeted a residential area," said Al Jazeera's Zeina Khodr, reporting from Beirut about the deadly strike.
"The Israeli army says it is hitting infrastructure, and that this is in retaliation for Hezbollah launching armed drones at its forces in the Ali al-Taher ridge overnight.
"It's not the first time the Israeli army accuses Hezbollah of targeting its forces in this area, which overlooks the city of Nabatieh's strategic high ground, which really remains contested territory. We know that the Israeli army wants Hezbollah to vacate this area, so we're seeing this increase in military pressure," she said.
According to Israel, Iran-backed fighters "launched two explosive drones" towards Israeli soldiers operating in the Ali al-Taher ridge, but there were no casualties.
Israel has stepped up its strikes on south Lebanon in recent days, following an August 15 wave of strikes that Lebanon said killed 11 people, including several children. Israel's military said the raids were retaliation for a Hezbollah attack.
Al Jazeera's Khodr said that while "there has been a reduction in the violence in recent days, we have also witnessed an escalation by the Israeli army".
"There is growing concern that the [Israeli] army may broaden this offensive, and it may become even more intense," she added.
Tensions between Israel and Lebanon have been escalating since Israel's genocidal war on Gaza began in 2023. Lebanon was dragged into the conflict on March 2, days after the US and Israel launched their war on Iran. Hezbollah struck Israel in support of Tehran. This was followed by massive Israeli air strikes and a ground invasion that Lebanese authorities say have killed more than 4,300 people.
The continued strikes have renewed debate in Beirut over the "framework" agreement Lebanon signed with Israel in June, which envisages a phased Israeli withdrawal in exchange for the deployment of the Lebanese army and the disarmament of armed groups, a reference to Hezbollah.