Artificial intelligence should not be dominated by one country, Chinese President Xi Jinping has said, urging international cooperation on development at a major conference in Shanghai.
Xi also emphasised the importance of a "people-centred" approach to AI technology in his keynote address at the opening ceremony of the World Artificial Intelligence Conference on Friday.
Recommended Stories
list of 3 items- list 1 of 3China takes US crown for world's fastest supercomputer
- list 2 of 3Who will control Africa's AI infrastructure, and at what cost?
- list 3 of 3Hundreds of experts warn the world must prepare now for AI's impact
The conference showcases the cutting-edge technology Xi hopes will soon rival that of the United States.
Chinese AI models are gaining ground on the most powerful offerings from the US, attracting global users with lower costs.
But how to govern the booming sector has become a topic of debate amid concerns over the deployment of AI in military combat and its use by hackers or criminals.
In his address, Xi spoke of China's role in ensuring equitable access to AI capacity-building for developing countries to prevent the creation of "new historical injustices".
To that end, he announced China's plans to cooperate with international bodies, including from Africa, Latin America, Asia and BRICS countries, to provide AI-related opportunities.
"AI development should not be a solo performance by a single country, but a symphony of international cooperation," Xi said. "We should jointly oppose overstretching the national security concept in the field of AI or placing one country's security over that of others."
'Ensure AI is always under human control'
The US and European Union have imposed restrictions on Chinese tech imports, citing national security concerns, while recent tussles between Washington and American AI labs have raised questions about who controls access to top technology.
In May, the US Commerce Department issued a notice affirming its restrictions on shipments of semiconductors to subsidiaries of Chinese companies located outside China amid concerns about loopholes in Washington's export control regime.
The guidance said its licensing requirements for the export of advanced AI chips applied to all businesses with headquarters or a parent company in China.
At Friday's conference, Xi also stressed the need for a "people-centred" approach to AI with humans at the wheel.
"We should put in place laws and regulations, technological monitoring, early warning, and emergency response systems, in order to ... ensure AI is always under human control," he said.
AI has become a strategic pillar of China's industrial policy, driven by state investment aimed at building a domestic ecosystem, from chip production to consumer use.
Daily consumption in China of "tokens" - the industry unit of AI usage - has increased a thousandfold over the past two years, according to state media citing officials.
As Al Jazeera reported earlier, China, while lagging behind the US in access to the most cutting-edge semiconductors, holds the edge in powering the huge data centres that run on AI chips.
A typical data centre can consume as much electricity as 100,000 households, while next-generation "hyperscale" facilities can gobble up as much power as two million homes, according to the International Energy Agency (IEA).
China's access to an abundant supply of cheap electricity places it in the ideal position to meet such colossal energy demands.
It already generates more than twice as much electricity as the US, a lead that is expected to widen amid an aggressive state-led investment in the country's energy grid.