Turkiye's banking watchdog has revoked the operating licence of Iranian lender Bank Mellat's branch in the Turkish city of Istanbul.
"It has been decided to revoke the operating licence of Bank Mellat, Head Office in Tehran, Istanbul Turkey Central Branch," read the decision by the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency (BDDK), published in the Official Gazette on Saturday.
Recommended Stories
list of 3 items
- list 1 of 3Trump says Denmark deal gives US security 'control' over Greenland
- list 2 of 3Trump signs sweeping Russia sanctions over Ukraine war
- list 3 of 3Could US pull one-third of troops from Europe? What that would mean
The regulator said the decision was taken under a clause of Turkiye's banking law allowing a bank's licence to be revoked or withdrawn if its continued operation is deemed to pose a risk to depositors' rights or to the security and stability of the financial system.
Bank Mellat has been subject to Western sanctions for years over accusations that Tehran was pursuing a nuclear weapon under the cover of a civil nuclear programme.
Those sanctions were lifted as part of a landmark 2015 deal between Tehran and world powers to curb Iran's nuclear ambitions. However, the United States unilaterally pulled out of the agreement in May 2018, reimposing economic sanctions on the country.
Bank Mellat was hit by further US and Gulf sanctions in 2019 after being named as one of 25 entities linked to Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC).
The Turkish notice did not cite the US measures or specify operational issues.
Earlier this month, the US Treasury Department imposed sanctions on a small Turkish investment bank and two subsidiaries over alleged ties to Iran.
The Treasury Department accused Golden Global Yatirim Bankasi Anonim Sirketi (Golden Global Bank) of facilitating "tens of millions of dollars' worth of transactions for the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps-Qods Force" and providing the Iranian government with banking access to move its funds internationally.
Golden Global Bank has denied the accusations.