Assam, India - Debiram Panika, a 37-year-old daily wage labourer from northeastern India's Assam state, would speak to his wife and two daughters on video calls every day from Dimapur, a town in neighbouring Nagaland state where he worked.
But when his phone rang at about 11am on July 19, there was panic in the voice of his 30-year-old wife, Dipika.
Recommended Stories
list of 3 items
- list 1 of 3India's severe monsoon season causes more than 100 deaths since July
- list 2 of 3On huge river island in India's Assam, annual floods threaten local arts
- list 3 of 3'Nowhere else to go': In India's Assam, frequent floods hit river islanders
"I could only see my wife telling me on the video call, 'This is it for us. We are going to die,' before the call was disconnected," Panika recalled, speaking to Al Jazeera.
It was the last time they spoke. Moments later, rising waters from the nearby Dikhow River, which snakes past their village in Assam's Sivasagar district, surged into their bamboo-and-mud home with a ferocious current and swept away Dipika and four-year-old daughter Radhika.
"The water came flooding like sea waves, and they were gone in a flash," Panika said, as he stood in front of the ruined home he has since returned to.
Sivasagar is part of the eastern Assam region, also referred to as Upper Assam. Incessant rains between July 18 and July 20 submerged the region and the neighbouring Naga Hills of Nagaland.
Monsoon floods usually impact northern and western Assam, and parts of central Assam, the worst. But several Nagaland districts bordering Upper Assam received heavy rainfall on those three days, leading to dozens of landslides. This intense run-off swelled Naga Hills-origin rivers and caused devastation downstream.
The resultant floods killed more than 100 people, destroyed 2,700 villages, and displaced 700,000 people across the state. The state government says 1.2 million people were impacted in all, their lives disrupted.
Most waters have since receded, but Radhika's body is yet to be found.
"I look for Radhika every day in the bushes, tirelessly," Panika said, holding back his tears. "Her last words, calling me 'Papa', are still reverberating in my ears."
Panika's other daughter, Ridhika, 10, was at a relative's place a few metres away when her mother and sister were swept away by the flood. Ridhika held onto a bamboo bush and was later rescued by locals.
'Apocalyptic event'
Several riverine villages in Sivasagar have been wrecked by debris carried down by the waters of the Dikhow from the surrounding Naga Hills.
Tens of thousands of tree trunks lie piled up in places that used to be homes, as lush rice fields, the main source of livelihood, have been washed away.
Kukil Das, a 30-year-old Facebook vlogger in Debiram's village of Nepali Khuti, told Al Jazeera that "the torrent of the flood was like an apocalyptic event seen in the movies.
"Trees as tall as 30 to 40 metres (100-130ft) came down from the hills, flooding the river, and wiped out everything as they crashed against our homes," he said. "There is no home left. It was a tsunami."
Das and his friend Shravan Prasad, from the neighbouring Bihubor village, said they saved at least 1,000 lives by using boats the two villages had at that time.
"We put together a group of friends with the seven boats and started rescuing people turn by turn for two days and nights without food and water," Prasad said.
Das said the floods forced residents to take shelter on the roofs of concrete homes they could find, as cries for help and the sounds of the river washing away homes echoed in the neighbourhood.
Laxmi Sharma, who owned one such concrete house, said she provided shelter to at least 60 people on her terrace after the river water gushed into Nepali Khuti.
"People ran towards the roof of my building. We thought we were going to die," Sharma, 46, told Al Jazeera. "But it is a miracle that we are still alive even though my house was barely out of water."
Not everyone could escape the flood's wrath, though.
In Sivasagar's Simaluguri village, two friends - Reihana Ahmed, a Muslim, and Ratul Swarna, a Hindu, both in their 30s - were swept away in the torrent.
When Ahmed, a mother of two, was drowning as the deluge entered her village, Swarna, who did not know how to swim, jumped to save her without thinking about his life.
The two friends were later found dead in the paddy fields. "It was humanity that won in a disaster like this," Ahmed's husband Aminul Haque said with a sorrowful smile.
'Human-made flood'
Besides the eroding banks of the Dikhow River in Prajabasti, another flood-affected village, 75-year-old Asor Ali sat in disbelief next to his wife, Jamila Khatun.
"Even the generations preceding me have not seen a flood like this," he said, staring at the flowing river. "Even the 1950s earthquake that triggered the floods here did not do so much damage."
A magnitude 8.6 earthquake hit Assam and Tibet across the border in 1950, altering the region's riverine system. Nearly 5,000 people died. Since then, Assam has witnessed frequent floods, which intensify during the monsoons, says Mirza Zulfiqur Rahman, a researcher on the basin of the Brahmaputra, the region's major river: The Naga Hills rivers that flooded Upper Assam are its tributaries.
But residents say this year's deadly deluge is not just a natural phenomenon.
Biren Gogoi, 43, says rampant stone and sand mining in regional rivers, coupled with aggressive deforestation and coal extraction in Nagaland's Mon district, triggered the devastation.
Global Nature Watch, an open-source online platform that provides real-time data on deforestation across the world, showed that Nagaland lost 14 percent of its tree cover between 2002 and 2025, with Mon district bordering Assam's Sivasagar being the most affected.
According to the latest report published in 2023 by the Forest Survey of India, Nagaland has lost about 794.88 square kilometres (306.9 square miles) of forest cover between 2013 and 2023.
Al Jazeera travelled along the Assam-Nagaland border and saw signs of deforestation on the hills and mining activities in both the states. Satellite images also confirmed rampant coal mining in Nagaland's Mon district, and stone mining crushers on Assam's side, especially in Bihubor, one of the epicentres of the Assam flood.
While Mon's Deputy Commissioner Wennyei Konyak acknowledged the possibility of illegal mining in the district, he added that the land was protected under Indian laws to uphold the rights of Indigenous tribes, and therefore government interference in the area was limited.
"I would not blame mining activities for the flood. It was just the wrath of nature," he told Al Jazeera.
But experts and political leaders in Assam say mining played a direct role in the floods.
Debabrata Saikia of the opposition Congress party, who is the legislator from Sivasagar constituency, accused Assam's governing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) of allowing illegal excavations for stone and sand on the Dikhow riverbank, resulting in a cratered wasteland that worsened the floods.
"This unchecked plundering of riverbeds and hills under the ruling government has engineered this into a man-made disaster," Saikia told Al Jazeera.
Assam Chief Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma, however, rejected the allegation on August 4, blaming excessive rainfall in Nagaland for triggering the Upper Assam deluge. On August 14, Ranoj Pegu, a cabinet minister in the state's BJP government, blamed erratic rainfall due to climate change for the deluge.
Rahman, the Brahmaputra river basin researcher, believes that while the climate crisis played a role, the flood was "purely human-made", caused by the fracturing of the landscape.
"The unrestrained stone extraction from the Dikhow riverbed has damaged the river's natural cushion," Rahman said. "That means the river loses the capacity to resist high flows of torrents that break embankments and cause floods."
An official document from 2022, seen by Al Jazeera, also highlights mining as a factor in possible large-scale floods downstream on the Assam side.
Al Jazeera reached out to senior district officials in Sivasagar as well as state government officials for their comments on allegations of unchecked coal mining but did not get any response.
Back in Prajabasti village, Ali, the septuagenarian, is mentally preparing himself for future floods.
"It will happen again, so long as there is greed for land and coal in humans," he said. "Nature pays them back."