Russia has struck a key bridge in Kyiv just as German Chancellor Friedrich Merz arrived in the Ukrainian capital to meet President Volodymyr Zelenskyy.
The unannounced visit, marked by the sound of air sirens and explosions, came on Sunday to underscore Germany's support for the nation at a time when Russian attacks on Ukrainian cities are increasing.
In a written statement, Merz said he "travelled to Kyiv today because Ukraine needs all our support in the coming weeks".
"If Russia is not stopped, its war machine will sooner or later turn against us," he said.
Merz and Zelenskyy met at the National Academy of Sciences, which was struck by a Russian drone on September 28.
Zelenskyy told Merz that Kyiv's citizens are going through "terrible nights and days" due to the ongoing Russian attacks.
Merz was accompanied by his economy minister, as well as executives from several large German companies, such as Siemens Energy and Diehl Defence.
Ukraine and Germany are also expected to finalise a deal to produce drones and other weapons together that can travel more than 600 miles (965.6km) in an effort to strike deeper into Russia.
Germany has been one of Ukraine's staunchest supporters. In April, the two countries signed a military pact worth more than $4bn. On Sunday, a $1.1bn military aid package is set to be announced, alongside $394m to repair damage to Ukraine's energy sector.
Merz's visit comes a day after Russia warned foreign diplomats and nationals to leave the capital to avoid getting hurt.
Russia's Ministry of Defence promised to intensify strikes on Ukraine after Zelenskyy said in an interview with the Reuters news agency that it is doubling down on targeting Russian oil refineries after several civilians were killed and wounded over the weekend.
The strike that hit the Northern Bridge over the Dnipro River on Sunday also damaged a road and the supply of hot water in the area, according to a social media statement from Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko. It is the second bridge in the capital to be hit this weekend.
Russia's all-out war on Ukraine is in its fifth year. Both sides have increased the number of drone and missile attacks on infrastructure, logistics and military sites in recent months.