Alexander Zverev kept his bid for a second Grand Slam title alive with a straightforward win over Alejandro Tabilo, while Coco Gauff stayed strong to reach the fourth round of the US Open as several of her fellow Americans crashed out.
Naomi Osaka overcame a mental and physical battle to outlast Belgium's Elise Mertens in a three-setter on Louis Armstrong Stadium on Saturday.
Recommended Stories
list of 4 items
- list 1 of 4Sabalenka interrupts US Open match against Rakhimova over cannabis smell
- list 2 of 4US Open 2026: All to know about the schedule, top seeds and favourites
- list 3 of 4'Not a goodbye': Tearful Federer inducted into Tennis Hall of Fame
- list 4 of 4Djokovic suffers shock first round exit at US Open amid tears and pain
Two of the brightest young prospects in the women's draw, and close friends off the court, put on a show as American Iva Jovic edged Filipina Alexandra Eala in a thrilling clash at Arthur Ashe Stadium.
After back-to-back five-setters, top seed Zverev finally enjoyed a quieter night as he overcame a small mid-match dip to see off Chile's Tabilo 6-2, 7-6(2), 6-2.
"I think today was definitely much better than the last couple of days. I think I improved a lot from the baseline," Zverev said.
"I wasn't happy with the second set. I think, especially at the end of the second set, I lost focus a little bit. I was not moving as well. I was not playing as well. But I think the first and third sets are a big improvement to the other days. I'll try to focus on that."
Japanese 13th seed Osaka, a two-time US Open champion, worked through a challenge after letting slip a one-set and break advantage before managing an Achilles niggle to beat Mertens 6-3, 3-6, 7-5.
The match was as much a test of Osaka's composure as her tennis, with the 28-year-old showing visible frustration before regaining control in the decider.
"Honestly, I didn't feel like I played amazing, and it was really getting me down, like I was very negative on myself, so I'm really sorry about my behaviour," an emotional Osaka said.
Jovic, 18, and Eala, 21, traded momentum throughout a contest that lasted more than three hours before the American prevailed 7-5, 3-6, 7-5. Jovic, the 14th seed, will next face compatriot and fan favourite Gauff.
Fourth seed Gauff had earlier provided the day's clearest positive for the home fans, the 22-year-old beating Spain's Cristina Bucsa 6-3, 6-4, as the 2023 champion looks to win a third Grand Slam crown.
Second seed Elena Rybakina continued her quest for a third major title and the top spot in the WTA rankings, advancing after a 7-6(6), 6-3 win over Yuliia Starodubtseva.
Australian Open champion Rybakina avenged the second-round defeat she suffered to the Ukrainian at the French Open. The Kazakh will face Osaka for a place in the quarterfinals.
Iga Swiatek, the 2022 champion, beat Marie Bouzkova 7-6(3), 7-6(3), while French Open champion Mirra Andreeva advanced by downing Nikola Bartunkova 6-2, 7-6(5).
Americans take a hit
The day had begun with a string of painful exits for the home players.
Past US Open finalists Taylor Fritz, Madison Keys and Amanda Anisimova crashed out in the third round, dealing a stinging blow to the home fans at Flushing Meadows.
Ninth seed Fritz had yet to drop a set in New York and looked on his way to another routine victory before Argentinian Francisco Cerundolo flipped the script and won 3-6, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4, 6-4.
It was the earliest exit in four years for the 2024 runner-up, and Cerundolo will next face Belgium's Alexander Blockx, who shocked fifth seed Flavio Cobolli 6-7(4), 6-3, 6-0, 6-3.
The American women fared no better, as China's Zheng Qinwen came back from a 5-0 deficit in the decider to beat 2017 runner-up Keys 1-6 7-6(3) 7-5 on the Grandstand, collapsing on the court in utter joy as she fought back from a career slump.
The Olympic champion reached the quarterfinals for the second straight time only two years ago but was forced to go through qualifying this time after a chronic right elbow injury derailed her career progress.
Last year's runner-up and 10th seed Anisimova was unable to reverse her fortunes in a frustrating year at the majors, with a 6-2, 7-5 defeat by Anastasia Potapova.
Young American wildcard Michael Zheng was another casualty, unable to complete a comeback against Frenchman Arthur Gea in a 7-6(7), 3-6, 4-6, 6-3, 6-2 defeat. Gea became just the second lucky loser to reach the fourth round, after fellow countryman Corentin Moutet in 2022.
The day ended on a positive note for the home crowd, who spurred Learner Tien to a gritty 6-3, 1-6, 6-7(2), 6-3, 6-4 win over Czech Jakub Mensik.