Former Peruvian President Ollanta Humala has been released from prison after the country's Constitutional Court overturned his 15-year prison sentence for a case linked to a globe-spanning corruption scandal involving Brazilian construction giant Odebrecht.
Humala was serving his sentence at a special detention facility in eastern Lima that houses several of Peru's jailed former leaders. The 64-year-old and his wife, Nadine Heredia, were found guilty last year of money laundering for receiving illegal contributions from Odebrecht, now known as Novonor, and the Venezuelan government in two presidential campaigns.
Recommended Stories
list of 3 items
- list 1 of 3'Strategic partner': Peru's Fujimori plans to intensify ties with the US
- list 2 of 3Latin America is becoming a laboratory for tech-supremacism
- list 3 of 3Keiko Fujimori sworn in as Peru president after narrow election win
Heredia subsequently received asylum in Brazil.
"It has been decided to declare the entire criminal proceedings against Ollanta Moises Humala Tasso null and void," read the Constitutional Court ruling dated July 15 and published on Thursday.
Humala, a former army officer who led the country from 2011 to 2016, was the first Peruvian ex-leader to face trial in the Odebrecht corruption scandal, which has also tainted three other former presidents.
He had filed a habeas corpus petition - a legal request asking the court to examine whether he had been unlawfully imprisoned - which the Constitutional Court declared to be "well-founded" because it found that he had been convicted for conduct that was not legally defined as money laundering when the campaign contributions were received.
The former president's lawyer, Wilfredo Pedraza, said that his side has received the judgement "with considerable satisfaction".
In 2016, Odebrecht agreed to pay $3.5bn in penalties after having spent $788m in bribes to foreign leaders and government officials in order to win infrastructure projects across Latin America.
Odebrecht admitted to having paid at least $29m in bribes to Peruvian officials between 2005 and 2014.