South Korea's new interim football coach Robert Moreno has denied allegations that he relied on artificial intelligence during his last coaching role but admitted to using technology in his work.
Addressing his first news conference as the Taegeuk Warriors' temporary coach on Monday, Moreno promised to make South Korean football fans "happy".
The Spaniard was appointed as the Asian giants' temporary coach following a disastrous few months for the team and the country's football federation, during which on-field results and off-field controversies left the fans bitterly disappointed.
Moreno, who was forced to deny earlier this year that he used ChatGPT to prepare for games, will be in charge for friendly matches in the coming months.
He addressed allegations that he used artificial intelligence during his time in charge of Russian club Sochi, saying "It was a piece of news that is completely false and went viral."
Moreno left the top-flight side in September 2025 after a poor run of results, and reports said he had heavily relied on ChatGPT in his role, even using it to decide between potential signings.
"Obviously, I use technology," he said.
"Anyone who spends 10 minutes looking into it can see that everything has been taken out of context and put together to cause harm."
The Korea Football Association (KFA) said Moreno could stay on for the Asian Cup in Saudi Arabia in January-February, "subject to an evaluation".
Moreno named captain Son Heung-min in his squad for four upcoming home friendlies and said he wanted to put a smile back on South Korean fans' faces.
"We're going to try to do our work honestly and with the aim of making all Korean football fans happy," said the 48-year-old, who is the first Spaniard to coach South Korea.
"Good matches, and trying to help the players."
Moreno will lead the team against Ecuador and Uruguay in September and Venezuela and Uzbekistan in October.
South Korea had been without a coach since Hong Myung-bo quit following their shock group-stage exit from the World Cup in North America in June.
Hong's departure did little to quell public outrage over the disappointing campaign and added fuel to pre-existing questions about how he was hired.
Police raided KFA headquarters last month as part of an investigation into Hong's 2024 appointment.
The KFA also apologised for allegations that it provided sexual entertainment for foreign referees.
Moreno named striker Son, now in the United States' Major League Soccer with Los Angeles FC, in his first squad along with Atletico Madrid's Lee Kang-in and Bayern Munich's Kim Min-jae.
Hong's decision to leave Son on the bench in the first half of the decisive match against South Africa at the World Cup baffled and angered many supporters.
"We're all aware of Son's versatility," said Moreno.
"For me, he can play in three positions."