Ein el-Hilweh, occupied West Bank - Adel Daraghmeh lies on his side on a thin mattress laid straight onto the dusty ground, one arm flung out, a sandal hanging half off his foot. "We don't sleep, we barely drink, we barely eat," he says weakly.
Above him, a patchwork of dark tarpaulins and old blankets is tied together between a few bent wooden poles - the only thing standing between his family and a sun pushing past 43 degrees Celsius (109 degrees Fahrenheit) in the early afternoon.
Recommended Stories
list of 3 items
- list 1 of 3'Burn in hell': Israeli settlers spread hate through graffiti, attacks
- list 2 of 3Israeli government accused of complicity as settlers demolish Jericho homes
- list 3 of 3Israeli raids, arrests continue as UN warns West Bank at 'breaking point'
They are homeless again - their home destroyed days before by an Israeli bulldozer despite a court injunction they believed protected them. Beside him, his wife, Kheirieh, sits on a chair, a small plastic cup of water cradled in both hands.
About 30 metres up a slope, a settler-built fence now cuts across the hillside, cutting Adel and his brothers off from land their flocks grazed for generations. Past the fence, on the crest of the hill, an Israeli flag flies - visible from where Adel lies. "Isn't this a disgrace, what we are living in?" he asks, more than once, over the course of an hour.
Adel manages diabetes with daily medication, but it's been a struggle to obtain it in recent days. "They bulldozed the medication [in the house]," says Adel. "Our things, our household goods - all gone. They destroyed us. Our phones, the solar panels - no electricity, no water."
As the family has learned in recent weeks, as Israel gears up for fiercely contested elections in October, even an Israeli Supreme Court injunction may not stop the bulldozers from coming now.
'Five minutes to clear the whole area'
The wreckage of the Daraghmehs' house is still scattered: clothes, a pulverised medicine cabinet, a hollowed-out mini-fridge with its door hanging open, and split cinderblocks.
Even after their son Hilal's home was demolished shortly before without warning, the July 28 demolition of Adel and Kheirieh's home came as a shock. With Adel a short drive away in Tubas collecting medication, Kheirieh was home with their daughter, Hanaa, when Israeli soldiers, settlers and Civil Administration officials arrived with a bulldozer and about 10 other vehicles. "They came while I was asleep," she says.
Kheirieh walked out to meet them with the family's legal papers - proof, she believed, that the home was protected by an earlier Israeli Supreme Court order barring demolition until the family's case was resolved.
The court had suspended a 2022 demolition order while a case brought forward by the family progressed.
Soldiers took the documents, read them, conferred among themselves, and handed them back.
Then the bulldozer started anyway.
"Five minutes to clear the whole area," one of them told her, she says.
"I told him: I can't. I can't clear the area. I'm on my own, and I'm ill," she says. Already sick, and now seeing the bulldozers bearing down on her home with nearly everything she owned inside, she blacked out, waking up three hours later in an ambulance.
"And before I knew it, the bulldozer had started," she says. "The whole house - all of it. All our belongings. Gone."
"No order, no law," added Adel weakly from the ground. "No humanity."
'Discriminatory' system
"The army and the settlers demolished ... despite the existence of a court order prohibiting it," says Tawfiq Jabareen, the lawyer representing the Daraghmeh family, referring to the initial July 2 demolition of Hilal's home. "The prosecution claimed it was a mistake by the army, and that it would not happen again - but the demolition was repeated."
"The law and court rulings mean nothing to the settlers," adds Jabareen, "who try to circumvent them by every means, believing that imposing facts on the ground is stronger than any law or court ruling."
The Daraghmehs are herders of livestock who have lived along the Ein el-Hilweh spring, in the northern Jordan Valley, for generations. Four brothers and their families live in the area. "I was born here," Adel says. "My father was born here."
Nearby are the illegal Israeli settlement of Maskiyot and several settler outposts established in recent years, subjecting the extended family to numerous attacks, thefts and raids.
Like herding communities across Area C of the West Bank - under complete Israeli military and administrative control - the family has spent years navigating demolition orders under a planning system that leaves Palestinians almost no legal path to build.
Adel has had his home demolished before and spent significant money to rebuild it, he explains. What's different now, they say, is that even that limited process - a warning, a demolition order, followed by a chance to appeal - has stopped applying to them at all. No demolition order was presented for either Hilal's home or Adel's when they came to bulldoze them despite the court injunctions.
Soldiers, settlers and Civil Administration officials arrived together during the demolitions, according to the family and activists present.
Allegra Pacheco, chief of party of the West Bank Protection Consortium and a lawyer who has represented Palestinians before Israeli courts for decades, says the irregularity of such demolitions is no aberration in an otherwise functioning system.
"This is a continuation of the deterioration of any pretence of legal protection for Palestinians," she says. Even the ordinary planning process was built to fail Palestinians, she argues. Under a zoning system inherited from Jordanian and British Mandate-era law, Israel changed some of the laws to the detriment of Palestinians, leaving most Palestinian areas in Area C without approved building plans, while Israeli settlements - illegal under international law - are zoned and built freely.
"The Israelis set up the system to be discriminatory and to fail Palestinians," says Pacheco. "So people build anyway, get the stop-work order, then demolition [order] - which you can appeal. But you're appealing to the one who made the rule to discriminate against Palestinian construction.
"There's no way for Palestinians in general to win under the current Israeli legal framework."
As lines blur between authorities and settlers, who exactly spearheaded the demolition - soldiers, settlers, the Civil Administration - was unclear even to the family. "They're all the same when they come," says Hilal. "They're all together."
According to the United Nations' Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), since January 2023, more than 6,200 Palestinians, including more than 3,000 children, have been forcibly displaced, including more than 2,300 people since the beginning of 2026 alone. More than 907 Palestinian structures in the occupied West Bank have already been demolished this year.
Al Jazeera reached out to Israeli authorities and the military for comment on the events described in this article, but no response has yet been received.
'Nothing is holding them back'
A short walk from the rubble of his parents' home - and his own - Hilal sits under the shade of a tree beside the spring that sustained his family for generations, one that he and his flocks can no longer use.
Minutes earlier, he'd watched two settlers cool off at the spring, dousing themselves with water as one of them changed into a military uniform on the bank.
Hilal's own remaining cattle - most of the herd already stolen, confiscated or sold - scrounge instead for whatever run-off is left once the settlers are gone. "We used to drink from this spring, and carry water on the donkey," he says. "But they stopped us. The settlers fenced it off."
Later, he rides his donkey across the road to what remains of his home. What had been walls and a roof is now a field of scorched rubble and gnarled metal piping, bent and knotted where the bulldozer dragged it. On his donkey, Hilal points to where each room had stood. He estimates the losses at 170,000 shekels ($57,000).
"Not a single thing I got to take - all of it is gone," he says.
Next door, at the home of Adel's brother, Qadri - which was previously demolished in August last year - several relatives, who asked not to be named for fear of reprisal, describe an extended family bracing for its turn.
"Nothing is holding them back now," one son says. "They don't even need an order any more. Of course we are scared they will come for us next."
Prevented from rebuilding by nearby settlers and soldiers, Adel and Kheirieh now rely on relatives for help getting basic supplies. "All of our family helps each other," says one relative, "but it is so hard when we don't have enough, and we might be next."
Following earlier thefts by settlers and confiscations from authorities a year and a half ago, the family had another 50 head of cattle stolen by settlers, they say.
Amid deteriorating health, an exhausted, heat-stricken Adel sits up from lying on the ground only when the topic of past weddings comes up. His hoarse voice strengthens, and he breaks into a wide smile. Softly, he begins clapping out the rhythm of a dahiyyeh - the sung, chanted line-dance of Bedouin celebrations - his wavering voice rising over the sound of his own hands.
"What beautiful times together," he says. "Beautiful."
Then, as if that singing expended the last of his dwindling energy, he sinks back onto the sweat-stained mattress and exhales. "Inshallah those times will return," he says. "Inshallah."