A Hong Kong court has convicted Dow Jones for trying to deter a journalist from taking a union role, but also acquitted the publisher on the charge of dismissal over the role, in a case that raised concerns about media freedom in the city.
Selina Cheng, who was fired by the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) in July 2024, had accused the newspaper's publisher Dow Jones of unlawfully terminating her employment over her role chairing the Hong Kong Journalists Association (HKJA) and of trying to prevent her from standing for a union position.
Recommended Stories
list of 3 items
- list 1 of 3Hong Kong appeals court overturns Jimmy Lai's fraud conviction
- list 2 of 3Jimmy Lai sentenced: What happened to other HK pro-democracy protesters?
- list 3 of 3Hong Kong media mogul Jimmy Lai sentenced to 20 years in prison
The court found the company guilty on Thursday of trying to prevent Cheng's right to run for the union chairmanship.
However, the judge sided with Dow Jones' argument that she was made redundant because of corporate restructuring, and not due to her role as HKJA chair.
The right to take part in a trade union is protected by Hong Kong's labour laws. An employer found guilty on "prevent or deter" charges could be fined up to 100,000 Hong Kong dollars ($12,755).
"If reporters' employment rights are not sufficiently safeguarded, or when their rights are violated and not enforced in law, then we can no longer work safely as reporters," Cheng told reporters outside the court after the ruling.
The judge said the company's requirement that Cheng seek prior permission to take a union role was an "unjustified deterrent" of her rights.
Dow Jones said it disagreed with the ruling and was evaluating next steps.
"The Wall Street Journal has a long and proud history as an employer in Hong Kong. Throughout that time, we have remained deeply respectful of its labour laws and supportive of our employees' rights, while publishing excellent, impartial journalism about the region," a spokesperson said.
Sentencing is expected to be handed down at a later date.
Cheng launched a private prosecution last year for illegal termination, after filing a complaint with the Labour Department that did not result in a prosecution.
Founded in 1968, the HKJA is Hong Kong's longest-established journalists' organisation and one of the last remaining groups advocating for media rights in the city.
Although Hong Kong was once known for its independent news outlets, media freedom has come under strain and many outlets have disbanded since Beijing imposed a 2020 national security law following sometimes violent pro-democracy protests, according to international rankings and HKJA surveys.