The Los Angeles Dodgers have acquired the biggest prize on the trade deadline market, getting two-time reigning American League Cy Young Award winner Tarik Skubal from the Detroit Tigers.
Skubal got the news on Saturday night during the Tigers' 8-6 win over the Athletics and was emotional after the game as he prepared to leave the team that drafted him in 2018 and developed him into a pitching star to join the World Series champions for the past two years.
Recommended Stories
list of 4 items
- list 1 of 4Arteta expects more summer signings as Arsenal beat Girona in preseason
- list 2 of 4Why isn't anyone challenging Infantino for FIFA's top job?
- list 3 of 4Football reacts across globe to FIFA and Infantino's World Cup standdown
- list 4 of 4'Marathon' shines light on Gaza's orphaned children and humanitarian crisis
"I'm excited to be a Dodger," he said. "I'm excited to get down there and meet all those guys and chase three championships in a row. That's hard to do, so I'm so excited to be a part of that. But it's a lot of different emotions. Definitely kind of a roller-coaster a little bit."
Skubal is the latest star to join the high-priced roster for the Dodgers, which already has big-name players like Shohei Ohtani, Yoshinobu Yamamoto and Mookie Betts.
If everyone is healthy, he could be part of a rotation with Ohtani, reigning World Series MVP Yamamoto, fellow two-time Cy Young Award winner Blake Snell and Tyler Glasnow. The Dodgers lead the majors with a 3.36 ERA from their starting pitchers and now add Skubal to the mix.
The Dodgers are in first place in the National League West and before adding Skubal were already the favourites to become the first team to three-peat since the New York Yankees from 1998 to 2000.
ESPN first reported the deal and said the Tigers would receive three minor league prospects in right-handers River Ryan and Brady Smith and outfielder Zyhir Hope.
Skubal is eligible for free agency after the World Series in October. He has a $32m annual salary, a record total in arbitration after the team offered $19m, and is expected to sign an enormous contract in the off-season.
The 29-year-old left-handed pitcher said in July that it was his preference to finish the season with the Tigers and to compete for a World Series championship, which has eluded the franchise since 1984. Skubal said it was "very tough" to leave the Tigers having fallen short of the goal of winning a title.
Skubal is 7-5 this season with a 2.79 ERA and 116 strikeouts in 96 2/3 innings. He is 61-42 with a 3.04 ERA over seven seasons, all in Detroit. In two postseasons, Skubal is 2-1 with a 2.04 ERA in six starts.
Skubal had a minimally invasive surgery on May 6 to remove a loose body from his pitching elbow and returned to pitch on June 13.
"The way the surgery went is exactly how it was supposed to go," he said in July.