United States President Donald Trump claims the US has reached a deal with Denmark granting it "permanent control" over Greenland's security "and all other needs".
The announcement comes more than a year after the US president threatened to seize the self-governing Arctic territory, which is part of Denmark. Those threats roiled the NATO security alliance that Washington and Copenhagen are part of.
Recommended Stories
list of 3 items
- list 1 of 3EU pledges more than $200m to Greenland amid Trump annexation threats
- list 2 of 3US announces $400m investment in Australian rare earth mine
- list 3 of 3Massive iceberg capsizes off the coast of Greenland
According to Denmark, the deal is expected to be signed during next week's United Nations General Assembly meeting in New York. Copenhagen has stressed that it retains sovereignty over Greenland, and this deal will still need to be ratified in the Danish and Greenland parliaments.
Here's what we know about the deal and what it could mean for the US and Greenland:
What's in the deal?
The official text has yet to be released. But according to Trump, the deal gives the US permanent control over Greenland's security and "all other needs", at no cost to the US.
The deal bars US adversaries from establishing a military presence or making "sensitive investments" in Greenland without US approval, said Trump.
A US Department of State official cited by the BBC said the deal will mean non-NATO states won't be able to set up bases in Greenland and will be barred from "making investments in Greenland that could threaten the United States".
The official said that means China and Russia won't be able to build bases or send troops to Greenland, and that those states would be blocked from investing "in sensitive sectors".
However, Mikkel Olesen, a senior researcher at the Danish Institute for International Studies, told Al Jazeera that it is unlikely to be a major concession because "the Danes and Greenlanders never wished for Russia or China to have bases in Greenland."
However, it is unclear whether other countries could similarly be labelled "adversaries" to the US in the future, subjecting them to these restrictions.
Trump called the deal an "'Infinite Life' Agreement", meaning "it never ends".
The State Department official also said the agreement gives the US the right to build more military sites on the island without Greenland or Denmark approving. According to the official, the deal would remain in force even if Greenland were to become an independent state in the future.
There was no specific mention of potential US mining rights in Greenland, which has a rich deposit of rare-earth minerals, including zinc, iron, uranium and graphite, that are likely to interest Trump. These minerals are highly sought after and are used in the manufacture of hundreds of technological products, from smartphones to fighter jets.
However, some observers think this could be what Trump means by his mention of "sensitive investments".
The US president has sought to expand the US's global access to rare-earth metals, especially as China, a global leader in the technology, AI and renewables industries with 60 percent of the world's known deposits of these minerals in its territory, restricts their exports.
What have Greenland and Denmark said?
Greenland and Denmark acknowledged the deal on Friday, but neither gave specific details about its terms. They said the agreement would be announced next week.
Greenland's Prime Minister Jens-Frederik Nielsen said it "recognises Greenland's interests" and is "to the benefit of us all".
Denmark's Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen said it is "great for NATO and Europe", as it "strengthens our common security in the Arctic and the North Atlantic Area".
Olesen stressed that details of the deal remain unclear and that available information should be taken "with a grain of salt" as most of it has so far come from the US side.
Does the deal give the US ownership of Greenland?
No, it does not meet Trump's previously stated objective of "ownership".
Denmark's Frederiksen said the agreement "recognises the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Kingdom and the Greenlandic people's right to self-determination".
Olesen said the deal could be positive for Greenland and Denmark as it "has the potential to end the crisis" caused by Trump's insistence on acquiring Greenland last year, without sacrificing sovereignty.
Trump's earlier threats to seize control of Greenland were met with high resistance on the island of 56,000 people. A January 2025 poll found that 85 percent of Greenlanders opposed becoming part of the US.
What military rights does the US already have in Greenland?
A substantial number. Under a 1951 treaty, the US has broad overflight and basing rights on the island.
In addition to giving the US the right to build bases and maintain personnel, the treaty also stipulates that the US can "control landings, takeoffs, anchorages, moorings, movements, and operation of ships, aircraft, and waterborne craft".
As part of the treaty, the US currently operates a Space Force base in a remote part of northwestern Greenland - the Pituffik Space Base. It has more than 100 personnel stationed there.
What would actually change under this new agreement?
That largely remains to be seen. Trump said the US will "immediately" begin building up a large military presence on Greenland. However, the US already had the right to build bases and send personnel there under the 1951 treaty.
Imran Bayoumi, a former Pentagon official, told the Reuters news agency that it would be new if the US could now build bases unilaterally, but "it seems that Washington could have achieved a lot of these objectives through diplomacy and dialogue without straining the broader US-NATO relationship."
Trump has also said the US will support Greenlanders with "development and construction", without elaborating.
Richard Weitz, a fellow at the NATO Defense College, told Al Jazeera the deal "defuses perhaps one of the most severe sources of internal tension" within NATO.
While Trump "backed down and settled for less" than he sought with respect to Greenland, he still "got pretty much everything he wanted, except formal annexation", added Weitz.