The Israeli army has killed three Palestinians in Jenin in a rare air strike in the occupied West Bank, amid growing tensions in the territory.
In a statement, the Israeli military said it "eliminated" three people on Friday, one a Palestinian it described as a Hamas operative as well as two of his accomplices.
Recommended Stories
list of 3 items
- list 1 of 3Israeli army, settlers kill 2 Palestinians in separate West Bank incidents
- list 2 of 3Over 100 ex-diplomats urge France, UK to sanction Israel over Palestine
- list 3 of 3Israeli army and settlers injure several Palestinians across West Bank
Hamas condemned the strike but did not claim the person targeted - whom the Israeli military identified as Qais Bitawi - as a member. Palestinian Islamic Jihad said in a statement Bitawi was a senior operative of its armed wing.
A spokesperson for the Israeli military said the strike targeted a car carrying the men.
The Palestine Red Crescent ambulance service said Israeli ground troops raided the site of the drone strike, briefly detained medics and prevented them from transporting those wounded or killed to hospital.
The Red Crescent said its personnel were also detained after arriving at the scene.
The Palestinian Wafa news agency reported that the Israeli drone strike had targeted a house under construction in the western area of Jenin City, and that three Palestinians were killed instantly.
Photos from the AFP news agency showed Israeli soldiers removing a body from a house under construction on the outskirts of Jenin.
'Stop these crimes and end impunity'
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu celebrated the strike in a post on X, calling it a "successful thwarting" of the three targeted individuals.
After the attack, Israeli Defence Minister Israel Katz congratulated the military, police and Shin Bet for the strike and said the Jenin camp has been "evacuated of residents". He added that the Israeli military is now "permanently stationed there, like other terrorist camps" in the West Bank.
Hamas condemned the strike in a statement mourning "the martyrs who fell in the occupation's bombing of Jenin," saying that Palestinians "will continue to cling to their land and rights".
The group called on the international community "to take immediate action to stop these crimes and end impunity" and hold Israel "fully responsible for the repercussions".
The occupied West Bank, home to the Palestinian Authority, has seen soaring violence by Israeli settlers and soldiers but has recently avoided Israeli military strikes that have devastated the Gaza Strip since the genocidal war began on October 7, 2023.
Military raids on Palestinian towns in the West Bank are common, but Israel last carried out a strike there in February 2025.
Friday's strike in Jenin comes as separate Israeli strikes in Gaza killed at least five people, and as Nikolay Mladenov, the high representative for the United States-led Board of Peace, warned that the failure of both sides to adhere to the roadmap for peace "threatens a collapse of the ceasefire in Gaza".