Tulkarem, occupied West Bank - Hakim Mar'i spends his days lying on a single bed, his disfigured leg raised. The windows of Mar'i's dilapidated apartment, his latest temporary shelter, are covered with old blankets. Unable to work, Mar'i has no money for electricity, so the blankets have to do. At night, his family lives in near darkness.
The apartment is just around the corner from mounds of rubble and gnarled iron structures that mark one entrance to the now-emptied Tulkarem refugee camp. For Mar'i and other Palestinians, the camp was a home once considered temporary. But generations lived there, and now, the physical structure - their home - that tied his family together over the years is gone.
Recommended Stories
list of 4 items
- list 1 of 4UN raises 'ethnic cleansing' concerns over Israel's West Bank operation
- list 2 of 4Hamas slams Board of Peace for refusal to work with UNRWA in Gaza
- list 3 of 4Palestine weekly: Violent disruptions from olive groves to Al-Aqsa Mosque
- list 4 of 4Israeli flags become the latest weapon of settlers in West Bank domination
Impoverished, Hakim's family is in disarray. With its debts mounting and its members facing another eviction, he said he has considered taking his life several times over the past year and a half.
Mar'i cannot afford treatment for his debilitating leg injury, which has developed severe infections. He said he sustained it while working as a labourer inside Israel in 2019. The wound worsened after Israeli soldiers severely beat him when they forced his family from the Tulkarem camp. Diabetes and other untreated conditions have piled on, but he is unable to pay for the needed medical care.
"This joint here is completely gone," he said, gesturing at the swollen, blackened lower leg that prevents him from working.
"The medicine - by God, the medicine, I haven't been able to get. My wife and kids tell me: get out travel. Go to America, Turkey - so I can the medical treatment I need... I'm a sick man."
His mother, Salwa, sat beside him, less than a kilometre (0.6 miles) from their former four-storey home. She wept when asked about the family home that was built floor by floor after they were first displaced in 1948 from al-Khudayra, the Arabic name for Hadera, a city in Israel. "We really put a lot into that house," she said.
After their removal, the Israeli military razed the Mar'i home so a road traversing the now-emptied camp could be built. "Seeing it destroyed was really painful for us - all of us," she said.
It has been more than 20 months since Israeli forces emptied the Jenin, Tulkarem and Nur Shams refugee camps in a sweeping military operation in the northern West Bank, displacing tens of thousands of Palestinians whose families had already been refugees for three generations. Constantly renewed orders for a closed military zone now prevent their return.
Since January 2025, Hakim's family has been forced to move four times. First, they fled to a converted youth centre before landing in a cramped apartment with their four children, all under 15.
Unable to pay rent, the family could see the landlord's generosity run its course as this once-temporary housing arrangement now has no end in sight. Hakim owes money at the local shops for food he bought on credit. Some nights, the children eat at neighbours' houses.
"I have children. I have food. I have drink," he said. "My hands are empty. Nobody is with me. Nobody is standing beside me."
'We're already at the brink'
The Mar'i family is among more than 33,000 Palestinians forcibly removed from the Jenin, Nur Shams and Tulkarem camps by Israeli forces in early 2025. This is the largest single episode of forced displacement in the West Bank since Israel's occupation began in 1967, according to the United Nations agency for Palestinian refugees (UNRWA).
UN satellite imagery shows that 20 percent of all buildings across the three camps have been destroyed and another 28 percent are damaged.
"The level of destruction we are seeing is severe and unprecedented," said Roland Friedrich, director of West Bank affairs for the UN agency for Palestinian refugees, UNRWA.
According to Friedrich, 85 percent of those displaced have no regular income after many lost jobs when the camps were emptied. More than 80 percent of residents are renting, an unfamiliar expense for families who never paid for housing or utilities inside the camps.
The closed military zone covering the camps is renewed every two months, Friedrich said, with no indication of when - or whether - residents will be allowed to return. "What we saw there is forced displacement," Friedrich said. "The UN's position is very clear: People have to be allowed to return. The camps must be rebuilt."
Unlike after the 2000-2005 second Intifada when the Jenin camp was rebuilt, displaced families and UNRWA staff fear there is no return plan this time.
The Israeli military stated the camps were emptied for "operational security" in its effort to root out fighters from the camps. Friedrich worried the aim of the military operations is to "change the geographical expression of the Palestinian refugee issue".
Now more than 20 months into what was meant to be an emergency response, funding shortages have left UNRWA unable to cover the vast needs of the displaced population. It has moved some operations to keep schools and basic health clinics functioning. With funds dwindling, the agency has shifted to a "targeted approach", leaving thousands without support.
Friedrich pointed to a rise in gender-based violence linked to the economic strain on families and to growing depression and anxiety among displaced children observed by UNRWA's psychosocial teams. "We're already at the brink now," he declared.
'Everyone went their own way'
While Hakim's displacement plays out in the shadow of the camp, the family of Khadija Zbeidat face their own imminent eviction on the outskirts of Tulkarem. They live in the neighbourhood of Dhinnaba, where sparse houses are interspersed with greenhouses. They are unable to afford a residence closer to the city centre.
As Khadija sat on a couch in the middle of the yard, her many children and grandchildren ran past a small patch of plants she has planted - one of her few remaining joys. "I love plants," she said. "We had many flowers in our home in the camp. Having the plants here is all I have to feel like myself," she told Al Jazeera.
Khadija, a widow, shares a tiny spartan room with nine family members, nearly all children, along with a small bathroom and a kitchen barely big enough for one person to cook in. A worn couch takes up one corner. The ceiling is peeling above it.
The room was given to them rent free by a relative of Khadija's brother-in-law after they spent four months crammed into her daughter's house with nine other people. "It got really cramped, the pressure on each other," Zbeidat said. "And we became a burden too."
Khadija's family was displaced in January 2025 from the Tulkarem camp's Haret al-Nadi section, a significant part of which has been destroyed, she said.
"The camp was excellent," she said of their life before. "I swear, I wish they'd take us back. Everything was close to us, dear - ... the closeness, that sense of belonging and the warmth, the company and the neighbours."
The memories that she cherishes most dearly and that bring her to tears are of food: the stuffed grape leaves and the maamoul cookies made as a neighbourhood together for Eid. This year, there was none of it.
"Nothing. No cookies," she said. "Nobody even had it in them to do anything any more. Everyone went their own way - scattered."
Like the Mar'i family and others, they were not allowed to bring their belongings during their abrupt displacement. Some residents have since been allowed to retrieve belongings once or twice from their homes in the camps, but much of what they own remains left behind. Khadija's daughter-in-law at one point returned to the ruins of the camp - at the risk of being shot - to retrieve a doll left behind that Khadija's granddaughter Sandy would not stop crying about.
In Tulkarem, displaced families live either in the poorest areas closest to the camp, like the Mar'is, or on the cheaper outskirts, like the Zbeidats, remaining close enough to the health and schooling services that UNRWA still provides. But even a simple trip to buy groceries requires Khadija, who has no car, to travel 2km (1.2 miles).
At night, the family sits outside rather than in the stifling heat of the poorly ventilated room, watching Israeli military drones pass low overhead. "What to do? We're used to seeing them, to having them around, to them raiding houses," Khadija said. "It doesn't matter any more."
The military raids that always haunted life in the refugee camps have now come to wherever the displaced refugees have fled to. "We don't feel safe," Khadija said. "Nor the kids. It's dangerous. When they want to go out somewhere, my heart stays busy until they come back."
Waiting to be kicked out again
For months after the displacement, landlords, relatives and shopkeepers absorbed much of the shock, allowing families to stay for free or buy food on credit. But as the emergency stretches to almost two years now, that informal safety net is fraying. The pressure is felt particularly in economically moribund Tulkarem, where many families had relied on jobs inside Israel before Palestinian work permits were revoked after the Hamas-led attacks in southern Israel and the start of Israel's genocidal war in Gaza in October 2023.
The owner of the property where Khadija's family is staying recently sent his sister to tell Khadija's family to leave. "They think it's been too long," Khadija explained. "They want the land, to benefit from the land and the room. ... But where can we get money, where to pay from? The rent is very high, and we can't afford it. We don't know what to do if she comes again and kicks us out."
Hakim's family is on the brink of eviction too. Like others, he received from UNRWA a one-time rental subsidy of 3,000 shekels ($985) and a separate 1,700-shekel ($560) multipurpose cash payment for short-term assistance. "Every minute, I am waiting for the landlord to kick us out," he said.
Khadija's family survives on credit from shopkeepers who know their situation and, for now, still extend it - but patience is wearing thin.
Hakim said this goodwill is collapsing: "You tell them: 'Give me a day, two days. Be patient with me.' They won't bear it."
As distant as a return to her family's lands in 1948 feels now, Khadija still hopes to return to the camp one day. But she worries that her children may inherit an even more precarious existence than the one that preceded this latest dispossession - refugees for generations displaced yet again. "Only God knows what tomorrow will bring us," Khadija said.
If you or someone you know is at risk of suicide, these organisations may be able to help.