Two former Iranian female footballers say they are "proud" to have been granted Australian citizenship after being branded traitors at home for refusing to sing the national anthem before a game.
Fatemeh Pasandideh and Atefeh Ramezanisadeh, who were granted Australian citizenship at a ceremony on Wednesday overseen by Minister for Home Affairs Tony Burke, were members of a group of seven from Iran's delegation who asked for protection from the host country following the high-profile protest during the Women's Asian Cup in March.
Recommended Stories
list of 4 items
- list 1 of 4FIFA pledges to defend Infantino after World Cup rights plan collapses
- list 2 of 4UEFA's threatened legal action against Infantino and FIFA: What we know
- list 3 of 4Ex-Arsenal boss Wenger was 'not aware' of Infantino's FIFA plan
- list 4 of 4UEFA confirms legal letter served to FIFA after Infantino's World Cup plan
With their demands for protection an embarrassment for Iran's leaders but lauded by United States President Donald Trump, five of them later changed their minds and returned home.
"Yesterday was a truly special and unforgettable day for me. I feel proud and deeply grateful to become an Australian citizen," Ramezanisadeh said in a statement.
"After everything we've been through and all the challenges we faced, this moment means more than words can express," Pasandideh said.
A week after seeking asylum, the pair were pictured smiling and training with Australian club Brisbane Roar, which on Wednesday congratulated them.
"What they have been through since February is more than most people deal with in a lifetime," a spokesperson for the club said.
"To see them arrive at this point is something everyone here at Brisbane Roar is glad to have had a small part in," they added.
"Queensland is their home now. If they ever want to pull on a training top and come back out with us, the door will always stay open."
The plight of the rest of the team remains unclear since their return to Iran.
Reporters of the AFP news agency saw them cross into their homeland from Turkiye on a bus wearing the national team tracksuits and with their hair covered.
Soon after, Iranian Parliament Speaker Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf said on X that the players and their support team were "children of the homeland and the people of Iran embrace them".
By returning, they had "disappointed the enemies [of Iran] and did not surrender to deception and intimidation by anti-Iran elements", he added.