Manchester City have announced the record-equalling transfer of Enzo Fernandez for £125m - but Chelsea's deal for Monaco's Lamine Camara has dramatically fallen through after the transfer deadline. Chelsea are said to be furious after Monaco pulled out of a £47m deal for the 22-year-old midfielder at the last moment. They wanted to have a replacement for Fernandez lined up after City reached an agreement with Chelsea to sign the midfielder, matching the British record transfer fee Liverpool paid Newcastle United for Alexander Isak last summer.
Manchester City have meanwhile announced the £60m arrival of Iliman Ndiaye but Everton were dealt a bitter blow after the deadline as striker Folarin Balogun walked away from his £40m move from Monaco, after they had sold Beto to Fiorentina. The Toffees were left with Jack Grealish and Ainsley Maitland-Niles as their only deadline day replacements, while Tottenham have signed Mykhailo Mudryk on loan. Sunderland beat Crystal Palace to the signing of Malick Fofana after a dramatic tug-of-war for the £30m Lyon winger.
Manchester United did not sign a left back, despite being offered the chance to sign Rayan Ait-Nouri from rivals Manchester City. United were presented with a loan with obligation to buy but had no interest in a permanent move for the City defender. Liverpool's business is over after signing Bradley Barcola for £120m and agreeing to sign 18-year-old Belgian goalkeeper Lucca Brughmans next summer. Harvey Elliot, meanwhile, has joined Valencia on loan.
Arsenal's pursuit of Julian Alvarez has finally concluded with the forward remaining at Atletico Madrid, who refused to allow the Argentina international to join Barcelona. The Gunners have sold Gabriel Martinelli and Gabriel Jesus and even allowed Ethan Nwaneri to depart on loan and the window closes without Mikel Arteta signing the marquee attacking signing he craved.
Follow all of the latest news, rumours and done deals below
Rating every Premier League club's transfer window: Chelsea
Ins: Morgan Rogers (£117m), Maxence Lacroix (£52m), Marco Palestra (£47m), Geovany Quenda (£40m), Valentin Barco (£34m), Emmanuel Emegha (£21.6m), Pep Chavarria (£16.3m), Emi Martinez (£7.5m), Danny Welbeck (£5m), Jordan Henderson (free), Harrison Bettoni (undisclosed fee), Dastan Satpayek (£2.1m), Alfie Osborne (£400k)
Outs: Enzo Fernandez (£125m), Marc Cucurella (£52m), Andrey Santos (£50m), Nicolas Jackson (£47.5m), Liam Delap (£45m), Trevoh Chalobah (£25.7m), Tyrique George (£18m), Deivid Washington (£17.2), Marc Guiu (£14.6m), Tosin Adarabioyo (£7m), Omari Kellyman (£5.1m), Jimmy-Jay Morgan (£4m), David Datro Fofana (undisclosed fee), Caleb Wiley (loan), Mamadou Sarr (loan), Mykhailo Mudryk (loan), Axel Disasi (loan), Benoit Badiashile (loan), Reggie Walsh (loan), Dastan Satpayev (loan), Ryan Kavuma-McQueen (loan), Ishe Samuels-Smith (loan), Filip Jorgensen (loan), Ollie Harrison (loan), Alejandro Garnacho (loan), Chris Atherton (undisclosed fee), Kaiden Wilson (loan), Jesse Derry (loan), Harrison Murray-Campbell (loan), Frankie Runham (undisclosed), Joseph Wheeler-Henry (undisclosed), Jimi Tauriainen (free), Dario Essugo (loan), Robert Sanchez (loan), Dujuan Richards (loan), Borna Sosa (loan)
Verdict: The sheer number of comings and goings, and scale of their spending and selling, is simply astonishing. But it is hard to argue that Chelsea have not also done some very good business, particularly in receiving £125m for Enzo Fernandez. With the record buy of Morgan Rogers adding to a devastating front three of Cole Palmer and Joao Pedro, Chelsea have also strengthened key areas by signing centre-back Maxence Lacroix from Crystal Palace and addressing the problem position of goalkeeper by swapping the experienced Emiliano Martinez for the error-prone Roberto Sanchez. By managing to move on so many players (33 in total) Xabi Alonso now has a relatively slimmed-down squad that may now have a chance of challenging Arsenal for the title this season. The only regret, however, is their deal for Lamine Camara collapsed at the last minute after agreeing to sell Fernandez to City - and that was hardly their fault, with Monaco pulling out of an agreed deal.
Grade: A-
Rating every Premier League club's transfer window: Brighton
Ins: Luka Vuskovic (£46m), Zadok Yohanna (£21.5m), Pascal Struijk (£18m), Chema Andres (£15.5m), Jaouen Hadjam (£11.1m), Costinha (£11m), Michael Svoboda (£4.3m), Matias Orozco (£3.5m), Promise David (loan), Rodrigo Rego (undisclosed fee), Valentin Joseph (undisclosed fee), George Munday (undisclosed fee), Oliver Mayer (free)
Outs: Carlos Baleba (£70m), Jan Paul van Hecke (£52m), Carl Rushworth (£22.5m), Diego Coppola (£15.3m), Danny Welbeck (£5m), Jeremy Sarmiento (£3.4m), Harry Howell (loan), Facundo Buonanotte (loan), Joel Veltman (free), Tommy Watson (loan), James Beadle (loan), Brajan Gruda (loan), Yoon Do-young (loan), Adam Webster (released), Jacob Slater (free), James Milner (retired), Solly March (released), Zane Albarus (free), Billy-Ray Cullinane (free), Matthew Hayden (free), Charlie Pennan (free), Will Rutter (free), Nils Ramming (loan), Caylan Vickers (undisclosed fee), Igor Julio (loan), Eiran Cashin (loan), Charlie Tasker (loan), Freddie Simmonds (loan), Mark O'Mahoney (loan), Amario Cozier-Duberry (loan), Kamari Doyle (loan)
Verdict: Another window of savvy business from Brighton? Carlos Baleba's loss will be felt and the £70m fee the Seagulls will get from Manchester United is significantly less than the £115m or so they were holding out for last summer. But Brighton have been active in strengthening in several areas. The biggest coup was landing highly-rated centre-back Luka Vuskovic from Tottenham for a club record fee of £46m, while the surprise deadline signing of Spain Under-21 midfielder Chema Andres from Stuttgart appears a classic piece of Brighton business. The former Real Madrid academy prospect is nicknamed "baby Rodri".
Rating every Premier League club's transfer window: Bournemouth
Ins: Antonio Silva (£21.4m), Alvaro Rodriguez (£21.3m), Juanlu Sanchez (£11.1m), Michele Di Gregorio (loan)
Outs: Hamed Traore (£6.5m), Luis Sinisterra (£5.2m), Enes Unal (£1.2m), Matai Akinmboni (loan), Alfie Merritt (loan), Archie Harris (undisclosed fee), Alex Jimenez (loan), Alex Paulsen (loan), Owen Bevan (free), Romain Faivre (loan), Michael Dacosta (undisclosed fee), Marcos Senesi (free), Will Dennis (undisclosed), Ollie Morgan (free), Ashley Clarke (free), Noa Boutin (free), James Davies (free), Koby Mottoh (free)
Verdict: Keeping ahold of Alex Scott was the priority and Bournemouth were resolute in their stance even Arsenal and Chelsea circled. Eli Junior Kroupi may have been sold had it not been for a pre-season foot injury. It means new boss Marco Rose still has a talented squad to work with as he takes over from Andoni Iraola and leads Bournemouth into a history European campaign. The signing of 22-year-old centre-back Antonio Silva from Benfica could prove to be a bargain at £21.4m but Bournemouth's lack of depth could yet be tested by the extra workload of the Europa League.
Grade: B
Rating every Premier League club's transfer window: Aston Villa
Ins: Johan Manzambi (£51m), Nicolas Jackson (£47.5m), Ibrahim Mbaye (£47m), Joao Gomes (£34m), Zion Suzuki (£30m), Taylor Hawood-Bellis (£30m), Matteo Ruggeri (£21.4m), Leon Goretzka (free), Aaron Wan-Bissaka (loan), Alejandro Garnacho (loan), Modou Keba Cisse (joins next summer), Blade Earley (free)
Outs: Morgan Rogers (£117m), Ollie Watkins (£51m), Ezri Konsa (£51m), Youri Tielemans (£35m), Donyell Malen (£21.6m), Enzo Barrenechea (£12m), Lewis Dobbin (£9m), Lucas Digne (£8.5m), Emi Martinez (£7.5m), Josh Feeney (loan), Lino Sousa (loan), Kosta Nedeljkovic (loan), Samuel Iling-Junior (loan), Evann Guessand (loan), Joe Gauci (loan), Sam Proctor (loan), Andres Garcia (loan), Oliwier Zych (loan), Kadan Young (loan), Zepiqueno Redmond (loan), Benjamin Broggio (loan), Yeimar Mosquera (undisclosed fee), Louie Barry (undisclosed fee), Sil Swinkels (undisclosed fee), Cole Ramsey (free), Thierry Katsukunya (free), Ronnie Hollingshead (free), Junior Wilson, (free), Brad Burrowes (loan), Aidan Borland (loan)
Verdict: This was a painful summer for Villa, of that there is no doubt. Beloved Istanbul heroes have vanished in the shape of Morgan Rogers, Ezri Konsa, Youri Tielemans, Emi Martinez and Ollie Watkins. However, Villa did what they felt was necessary, to safeguard their future and wriggle free of Uefa's FFP regulations. The verdict may take some years, but Johan Manzambi, Ibrahima Mbaye and Zion Suzuki look like pillars for the long-term, while Nicolas Jackson, Joao Gomes, Taylor Harwood-Bellis and the experienced Leon Goretzka bring immediate experience to maintain Unai Emery's ability to compete. Alejandro Garnacho and Aaron Wan-Bissaka may not fall in either camp, though more optimism arrives in the shape of talented youngsters Brian Madjo and George Hemmings. The strategy was probably a little too drastic to realistically compete for a trophy and retain a place in the top four, but Emery is just about the perfect manager to oversee this transition.
Grade: C-
Rating every Premier League club's transfer window: Arsenal
Ins: Bruno Guimaraes (£75m), Ezri Konsa (£51m), Piero Hincapie (£45m), Christos Tzolis (£34m), Illan Meslier (free), Elijah Upson (free), Igor Tyjon (undisclosed fee), James Scanlon (undisclosed fee)
Outs: Gabriel Martinelli (£55.7m, still to be confirmed), Leandro Trossard (£15.3m), Jakub Kiwior (£14.5m), Gabriel Jesus (£8.6m) Fabio Vieira (£7.7m), Christian Norgaard (£7m), Karl Hein (£2.6m), Ismeal Kabia (loan), Reiss Nelson (released), Takehiro Tomiyasu (free), Josh Nichols (free), Samuel Chapman (free), Ethan Nwaneri (loan), Tommy Setford (loan)
Verdict: All the noises coming out of the Premier League champions this summer suggested that Mikel Arteta wanted to add a marquee attacking signing to his title-winning squad. With all due respect to Christos Tzolis, he is not it. Instead, Arsenal were beaten to the signing of Morgan Rogers by Chelsea, saw Vinicius Jr remain at Real Madrid after a very public courting, and did not make an approach for Julian Alvarez after Atletico Madrid refused to negotiate with Barcelona. Having sold the popular Gabriel Martinelli, Leandro Trossard and Gabriel Jesus, there is a danger that Arsenal are found short on the left side of their attack, although they have also avoided making expensive splurges on second-choice options. Still, Arsenal's strength and depth across the rest of their squad is surely the envy of the Premier League and in Bruno Guimaraes and Ezri Konsa they have made two shrewd additions. This perhaps wasn't the window Arsenal fans wanted. It is still good enough to win defend their title.
Grade: B+
The Premier League's obscene transfer window has broken football
With over £3.3bn spent on transfer fees, the Premier League has more money than ever before, yet this was the summer where American-style 'trading' also left fewer clubs satisfied with their business.
Miguel Delaney analyses:
DONE DEAL! Crystal Palace sell David Ozoh
Crystal Palace have sold academy product David Ozoh to Derby County for an undisclosed fee.
DONE DEAL! Coventry confirm loan move
Coventry have confirmed the loan departure of Raphael Borges Rodrigues to Burton Albion.
Oliver Dovin has also moved to Leyton Orient for the season.
DONE DEAL! Palace round off summer with Dario Osorio
Crystal Palace had three deal sheets in, and they've got their third late signing over the line.
Dario Osorio has joined from Midtjylland on a season-long loan.
Man Utd in shock move for Man City left-back Rayan Ait-Nouri before transfer deadline
Manchester United made a shock approach to sign left-back Rayan Ait-Nouri from rivals Manchester City before the transfer deadline.
United checked with City on whether they could sign the defender on loan, following an approach from the Algeria international's representatives last week.
It is understood, however, that United were informed that a loan would only be possible with an obligation to buy, which United were not interested in.