Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
The Premier League returns with champions Arsenal hosting high-flying Leeds in the first fixture after the seismic Manchester City verdict.
Arsenal are second in the table with four wins from their opening five matches but were heavily, and easily, beaten by Brighton last time out as they went down 3-0 at the Amex Stadium. Fresh from signing a new contract that will keep him at the Emirates until 2030, Arteta must now sweep that defeat aside as he looks to keep pace with current league leaders Manchester City - though there is plenty of uncertainty about how the rest of this season may pan out after recent news.
Leeds, meanwhile, remain unbeaten this season, winning twice and drawing their other three fixtures so far. They will expect to have to be at their best after making the trip south to London, though, as they go in search of a statement success.
Follow all of the latest from the Premier League clash with our live blog below:
Arsenal 0-0 Leeds, 45 + 1 minutes
Into three additional minutes at the end of a first half probably edged by Leeds.
Arsenal 0-0 Leeds, 44 minutes
Another sharp stop! David Raya is again required to make himself big to prevent Gabriel Gudmundsson thumping home on the bounce after another cross caused a spot of chaos along the line of the six-yard box.
Arsenal 0-0 Leeds, 43 minutes
Two good bits of defending from Leeds' booked duo: Ao Tanaka and Ethan Ampadu both would have been in bother had they not got the ball with challenges on the retreat.
Arsenal 0-0 Leeds, 42 minutes
That lifts the home fans a touch, Noni Madueke's curving cross flicked over the bar by Kai Havertz. Mikel Arteta scribbles a few thoughts on his notepaper.
Arsenal 0-0 Leeds, 41 minutes
Arsenal just need to find their flow again. Leeds have totally drained the energy of the Emirates, which is very, very quiet at the moment.
Arsenal 0-0 Leeds, 38 minutes
That's two central midfielders booked, though, which is an area of concern for the visitors. Leeds captain Ethan Ampadu is shown a yellow card for a similar foul to that which resulted in Ao Tanaka receiving the same sanction.
Arsenal 0-0 Leeds, 36 minutes
Raya is pressed into service again and rounded by Noah Okafor - though the Leeds forward is offside. Daniel Farke will be very, very pleased wth the manner in which his team are threatening the champions, though - and perhaps disappointed they've not made more of these chances.
Arsenal 0-0 Leeds, 36 minutes
Ao Tanaka receives the game's first booking, felling Myles Lewis-Skelly in transition...but only after Leeds pass up another great chance, Anton Stach all alone in space but not found with David Raya rushing out well to smother the danger.
Arsenal 0-0 Leeds, 34 minutes
Almost! Anton Stach delivers a long diagonal free kick into the Arsenal box, which David Raya comes all of 16 yards to punch. His contact is poor, though, and the Spaniard has to be very, very hasty in retreating to ensure a header back the other way does not beat him back to the line. Ethan Ampadu was the would-be scorer; Raya was there in the nick of time to deny him.
Raya soon shows the other side of his game, though, with a fabulous pass to spark an Arsenal attack that doesn't quite fully materialise.
Arsenal 0-0 Leeds, 33 minutes
A patched-up Justin is ready to return but unable to do so as Arsenal win back possession high up the pitch. Referee Paul Tierney eventually grants him the chance to rejoin the Leeds defensive effort as Ao Tanaka does his job towards the opposite sideline, winning a one-on-one duel and then drawing a foul.