Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
A verdict over Premier League charges against Manchester City is finally set to be delivered after a bombshell report said the club have been "found guilty on almost all of the charges".
The Independent understands that the former champions have been found guilty of breaking the Premier League's financial rules over a nine-year period between 2009 and 2018, in what would be a seminal moment for the richest football league in the world.
The landmark ruling, first reported by The Athletic, follows one of the most significant court cases in the history of sport, with the verdict also having major repercussions for City's rivals. The Premier League have declined to comment, however.
City, currently top of the Premier League after five games, were charged with over 115 alleged breaches of the Premier League's financial rules in February 2023, with the club always denying any wrongdoing throughout the process.
An independent commission was appointed following a four-year investigation. Sanctions have not yet been decided, according to The Athletic, and City are expected to appeal. A club spokesperson said the Premier League process "remains ongoing".
City have been England's most successful team since the club's fortunes were transformed by Sheikh Mansour's takeover in 2008. There are a wide range of punishments available to the top-flight's authorities. Sanctions could include fines and/or points deductions, and even expulsion as a member of the Premier League.
Follow all the latest news, reaction and analysis to one of the most important moments in the Premier League's history:
Man Utd assess financial damage incurred during period in which Man City guilty of breaches
Manchester United have started internal assessments over the potential financial losses sustained during the period when Man City are now reported to have broken financial rules in the Premier League.
The Athletic are reporting City's biggest rivals are now considering the losses suffered in that period.
The prospect of missed Premier League titles and missed Champions League qualification, which would hit the club financially, are all being considered, adds the report.
What has Enzo Maresca said on Man City's charges?
Manchester City manager Enzo Maresca, who took over from Pep Guardiola in the summer, said before the start of the season that he had "no concerns" over the Premier League charges.
Maresca was previously Guardiola's assistant and was at the club in February 2023 when they were charged by the Premier League with breaking their financial rules.
"The only thing I can say is three years ago, the treble season, I was here, and it was the same words about this," Maresca said in July.
"In three years, it's still the same. Nothing has happened. I don't have any concerns, personally."
Maresca has won his first five games of the Premier League season after signing a three-year contract.
Man City are expected to appeal - what does that look like?
Now, the club will have the chance to appeal against the decision of one of the most significant court cases in the history of sport.
Regardless of the judgement, both sides - the Premier League and Manchester City - knew they would have the chance to appeal within 14 days of the ruling.
Such an appeal would trigger a fresh three-person commission to look into the case, the members of which will be selected by Murray Rosen KC, the chair of the Premier League's judicial panel.
This would lead to a further delay of the imposition of any sanctions or points deductions until the appeal process is complete.
A Manchester City spokesperson said: "The Premier League process remains ongoing, with significant elements to be completed, and subject to strict confidentiality. As such Manchester City FC's position remains consistent with the club's statement of February 2023.
"The club has diligently respected due process for eight years on the basis the Premier League board and executive would behave as an independent, impartial and fair minded regulator, free from partisan influence."
Simon Jordan reacts to reported verdict on Man City charges
Former Crystal Palace owner Simon Jordan has commented on Man City's 115 charges: "If you can expel Southampton from the worlds richest game
"What can you do to a club, found guilty of a breaching financial regulations on a systemic level in the worlds richest league?
"The length and breadth of this and who this touches is going to be so revealing."
Man City timeline: From Abu Dhabi takeover to 115 Premier League charges
So how did we get here? It's coming up on two decades since a takeover that changed English football - this is the full timeline:
Could the Independent Football Regulator play a role?
If City are indeed found guilty of the most serious charges, the Independent Football Regulator could push for the removal of key figures. That body does have powers under section 34.
Some in football are even broaching the idea of a forced sale due to the severity of the case, given that this would be perceived as the greatest case of cheating in English football history.
It should not be forgotten that this is ultimately about the allegation of submitting false accounting.
The charges didn't just involve accusations of breaching financial regulations on several occasions, but of not providing accurate payment details.
A sanctions hearing would determine the most immediate punishments. Multiple sources feel this can't possibly go without a huge points deduction, particularly given the recent precedent of Everton and Nottingham Forest, potentially enough to relegate the club.
Prime Minister warns not to 'jump to conclusions' after report of verdict
Prime Minister Andy Burnham has warned people should not "jump to conclusions" on City, when asked whether they should be stripped of their Premier League titles.
He told ITV Granada Reports: "I've only just been made aware of it - I think these are reports at this stage. But if they're confirmed, obviously I will want to look at the report of the independent commission.
"People shouldn't jump to those kind of conclusions (about City having their titles taken off them). I know, this has been a long process between the club and the Premier League. I think quite a contested process. So I don't think it's as simple as jumping to conclusions.
"I think we would all need to study the independent commission's report in some considerable detail before reaching any conclusions."
WATCH: Fans react as Manchester City reportedly found guilty
Verdict could 'open floodgates' to legal challenge, expert says
A guilty verdict against Manchester City for a mass breach of Premier League rules would "open the floodgates" to further cases against them, a legal expert has said.
The club are reported to have been found guilty on virtually all the charges laid against them by the Premier League back in February 2023, charges the club have always strenuously denied.
The Premier League has not commented on the reports, while a spokesperson for City said the process remained ongoing "with significant elements to be completed".
An appeal by City in the event of a guilty verdict would be a certainty, but if the independent commission's reported decision is upheld, Paul Stothard, a partner at global law firm Norton Rose Fullbright, felt the ramifications would be seismic.
"This result, if upheld, will open the floodgates to further legal challenges," Stothard said.
"Manchester City being found liable for 114 out of 115 rule breaches means that other clubs may choose to pursue compensation for lost revenue, missed European qualification or relegation - though they would need to be able to prove how City's breaches impacted on their own ability to compete and their quantifiable loss.
"The outcome underscores the need for regulatory mechanisms in professional football and, moving forward, could help reshape how football governance balances commercial interests with the principles of fair play in what is now a multi-billion-pound competition."
The Man City verdict is an earthquake - what comes next could be even bigger
After a seismic day for football, Miguel Delaney explains why many more tremors could be to come: