The Premier League is back but that will not stop the transfer madness bubbling away in the background with more than a week remaining in the window.
Liverpool head coach Andoni Iraola has admitted that he is short of wingers, which has seen two offers for Yankuba Minteh, the latest for £60m, rebuffed by Brighton, as they step up their search for a successor to Mohamed Salah. Curtis Jones has left for £30m, joining Inter. And the Reds would like two wide players, Minteh and then, perhaps, Bradley Barcola, but Paris Saint-Germain are looking for £145m. Real Madrid's Endrick has also been floated as an option this weekend.
Arsenal are exploring a move for Juventus forward Kenan Yildiz as Mikel Arteta seeks to complete his transfer plans for an assault on both the Champions League and Premier League for the new season. The Gunners have announced the signing of Ezri Konsa from Aston Villa, with attention now turning to the left side of attack and the 21-year-old Turkey international is high up on their list of targets.
Manchester United have a deal in place to sign Brighton's Carlos Baleba for £70m, ending a pursuit that begun last summer, while Tottenham have agreed a deal to sign winger Savinho from Manchester City for an initial £75m, with Omar Marmoush tipped to follow the Brazilian. While City have identified Brazilian winger Allan as a possible replacement.
Follow all of the latest news, rumours and done deals below
Newcastle eye Milan forward?
Newcastle and RB Leipzig are competing to sign AC Milan striker Christopher Nkunku, reports Fabrizio Romano.
The former Chelsea star is available with Ruben Amorim sanctioning his exit since taking over at the San Siro this summer.
Hull target Paris forward
After victory over Man United, Hull City could bolster their squad with a move for Paris FC forward Ilan Kebbal.
The 28-year-old hit nine goals and chipped in with four assists in 29 games in Ligue 1.
The Tigers would need to beat off competition from Marseille, reports Foot Mercato.
Hull City owner Acun Ilicali admitted on Saturday he is keen to sanction more buys if the price is right.
USA striker on Barcelona's radar?
Barcelona could target a move for Folarin Balogun, L'Équipe reports.
With no Robert Lewandowski or Ferran Torres, Hansi Flick is after a new striker.
Tottenham and Aston Villa are thought to be keen too after Balogun's fine World Cup performances for the USMNT.
Andoni Iraola praises Cody Gakpo amid reports of Liverpool exit
Andoni Iraola said Cody Gakpo can offer a lot to Liverpool this season, both as a winger and as striker, amid reports that Tottenham will submit a bid for the Netherlands international.
"Cody is performing really well, has been training very well since first day, understanding everything we need," Iraola said. "You can feel it straight away, he is smart, understands the game.
"He has been one of our best players in the friendlies, definitely performing very well. I cannot tell you the XI. The players do not know it, but he is in a good shape.
"I think Cody can play as a No 9. Not tried it preseason because we don't have enough wingers.
"He knows what we need from him in his preferred position as a left winger, but I have spoken to him about his minutes as a 9. He's done it before and he can help us there."
Villa prepare Jackson bid
Chelsea are braced for a bid from Aston Villa for Senegal striker Nicolas Jackson.
The 25-year-old had a lively World Cup off the back of a disappointing loan spell with Bayern Munich.
But the Telegraph reports that Unai Emery could look to add the Chelsea striker with an offer close to the £65m valuation.
Atletico Madrid are seemingly out at that price, despite their lofty £150m valuation of Julian Alvarez with Barcelona and Arsenal keen.
Arsenal consider Victor Osimhen?
Now this would be audacious, Arsenal in for Victor Osimhen?
It's hard to imagine Mikel Arteta doing that one, with Kai Havertz, Viktor Gyokeres and Gabriel Jesus still in the building, but the former Napoli striker has long since been linked with the Premier League, which could suit his all-action style.
Arsenal explore move for Kenan Yildiz after missing out on Vinicius Jr
Arsenal are looking into whether a deal for Juventus' Kenan Yildiz is possible in this window, as Mikel Arteta seeks to complete his transfer plans for an assault on both the Champions League and Premier League for the new season.
Arteta has long identified the left side attack as a priority position to upgrade, with Real Madrid's Vinicius Jr having been the ideal target. The Brazilian's decision to stay at the Bernabeu caused Arsenal to reconsider the situation, and some thought has been given to waiting until either January or next summer when other deals could become possible.
Chelsea defender heads to Napoli on loan
Napoli have officially confirmed the signing of Chelsea centre-back Benoit Badiashile on loan.
The Serie A giants have an option to buy for a fee thought to be €23m (£19.7m).
"Napoli announced that it has acquired the sporting rights to the player Benoit Badiashile from Chelsea on a temporary basis with a permanent option," read a club statement from the Italians.
The loan fee could be in the region of €3m (£2.6m) with a further €20m (£17m) to €27m (£23m), depending on reports, should Napoli wish to make the deal permanent.
Villa eye free transfer for Germany international
Aston Villa are looking into a move for free agent and Germany international Leon Goretzka, reports The Athletic.
Goretzka left Bayern Munich at the end of last season and could prove to be a cheap fix with Amadou Onana out long-term with an Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL) injury.
Villa did have talks with Bayern over a loan with an option for Joao Palhinha, the report adds.
Juventus boss dashes Arsenal hopes of signing Yildiz
Juventus manager Luciano Spalletti is adamant Kenan Yildiz will not join Arsenal or any other club this summer.
"They can offer whatever they want, but I want Kenan Yildiz with us".
"His future is already important at Juventus".