Donald Trump's nominee for attorney general, Todd Blanche, is preparing for a bipartisan grilling over two days of contentious confirmation hearings in the Senate.
Blanche, who has been serving in an acting capacity since Trump fired his predecessor Pam Bondi in April, is expected to face questions from the Senate Judiciary Committee about the administration's retribution campaign against the president's political enemies and a controversial deal that shields Trump and his family from tax investigations.
A former criminal defense attorney to the president, Blanche is also expected to take questions about his handling of the release of millions of files stemming from investigations into Jeffrey Epstein and whether the Department of Justice will prosecute anyone else connected to the late sex offender.
After meeting with the nominee Tuesday, the committee's top Democrat Dick Durbin said Blanche had told him he had "made a mistake" by endorsing what critics have called a "slush fund" for Trump's allies.
If Republicans cannot quickly replace the late Sen. Lindsey Graham on the panel and GOP Sen. Thom Tillis refuses to back Blanche, it could end in a stalemate that prevents him advancing to a full Senate vote.
Trump praises 'phenomenal' Blanche ahead of hearing
This is how President Donald Trump championed his nominee on Truth Social last night, claiming he had brought down violent crime and "ended the Weaponization of our Justice System," which Senate Democrats may have something to say about later today:
"Todd Blanche is doing a PHENOMENAL job as Acting Attorney General of the United States. Under Todd's incredible leadership at DOJ, Murder is down to the LOWEST level since 1900, and we just saw the biggest one year drop in RECORDED HISTORY. Violent Crime arrests are UP 100%. Robberies, Carjackings, and Assaults, are all CRASHING. More than 500 million deadly doses of Drugs have already been seized, saving countless innocent lives. This is what happens when you unleash LAW AND ORDER on our streets, instead of protecting vicious Criminal Thugs, and releasing dangerous Illegal Aliens into our Communities like the Dumocrats did for four disastrous years under Sleepy Joe Biden.
"Todd has fought hard for Religious Liberty, ended the Weaponization of our Justice System, protected FREE SPEECH, kept Men OUT of Women's Sports, strengthened Election Integrity, and gone to all-out-WAR against Fraud like nobody in the History of the Department of Justice. He is tough, brilliant, and 100% LOYAL to our Constitution, and the American People.
"When the Corrupt Biden 'Injustice' Department and Radical Left Prosecutors tried to throw me in jail, and interfered in our Historic 2024 Presidential Campaign, Todd stood by my side and fought off the Lawfare. He is a great lawyer, always very fair, and every Republican Senator should vote to CONFIRM Todd Blanche, ASAP!"
New Mexico's Epstein investigation is being obstructed by Trump's DOJ, officials claim
New Mexico officials are accusing Todd Blanche and the Department of Justice of denying them access to documents connected to the federal government's investigation into Jeffrey Epstein as the state performs its own probe into the sex offender's alleged crimes at his Zorro Ranch property.
What to expect at today's confirmation hearing
Todd Blanche is set to appear before the Senate Judiciary committee at 9 a.m. ET.
His nomination hangs on the support of every Republican on the committee.
Todd Blanche set for contentious confirmation hearing as he seeks attorney general role
Hello and welcome to The Independent's live coverage of Todd Blanche's confirmation hearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee as the panel weighs the prospect of advancing his candidacy for attorney general to a full Senate vote.
President Donald Trump's nominee to succeed Pam Bondi, whom he fired in April, was previously deputy attorney general and has led the Department of Justice in an acting capacity since his predecessor's departure.
Wednesday's hearing is expected to be highly contentious, with Blanche grilled on his handling of the Jeffrey Epstein files and the DOJ's alleged persecution of Trump's political foes, among other hot button issues.