Prince Harry will on Friday find out the cost of his failed legal claims against the publisher of the Daily Mail, as he and Meghan Markle prepare to return to the UK.
The duke and six other household names brought legal action against Associated Newspapers Limited (ANL), the publisher of the Daily Mail and Mail on Sunday, alleging it had carried out or commissioned unlawful activities such as landline tapping, hiring private investigators to place listening devices inside cars or "blagging" private records.
However, the cases were dismissed after an 11-week trial earlier this year.
It comes as, six years after they relocated to the US, Harry and Meghan are expected to leave the United States and make their home in a non-royal residence outside London.
Asked whether the government would pay for their protection on their return to the UK, Andy Burnham said: "It's a matter for Harry and Meghan and we wish them well in the move that they're making."
Recap: What we know about Harry and Meghan's return to the UK
Harry and Meghan are expected to return to the UK before the end of this month.
It is understood they will live outside of London, with reports suggesting they've looked to the Cotswolds and Northampton area, and send their children to British schools.
There will be no photographs of the children when they start school and on their birthdays as for working royals, it is understood.
British media organisations have been instructed by the press regulator not to reveal the location of their new family home nor the children's school.
The King is said to be glad to be able to spend more time with the Sussex family, but remains adamant they will not be working royals, and there is no half-in, half-out option.
Questions remain about how their security will be funded following a protracted legal battle with the Home Office where Harry made the case for them to provide security for Meghan and their children when in the UK.
Meghan could return to acting as she comes to the UK - report
The Duchess of Sussex could make a return to acting after she moves back to the UK, according to reports.
Sources close to the Sussexes have not denied reports that Meghan Markle has been offered an acting role in the country, Australian site news.com.au reported.
The news outlet suggested one of the reasons the couple decided to return to Britain was that the duchess had been offered a job in an upcoming project.
The duchess was formerly an actress, known for her role as Rachel Zane in legal show Suits.
The real reason Harry and Meghan are leaving Hollywood for Britain
Meghan 'begged royal family not to drop Harry's security'
Meghan told Oprah Winfrey in 2021 that she had urged the royal family not to remove Harry's security.
She said: "I even wrote letters to his family saying, 'Please, it's very clear the protection of me or Archie is not a priority, I accept that, that is fine - [but] please keep my husband safe.
"'I see the death threats, I see the racist propaganda, please keep him safe, please don't pull his security and announce to the world when he and we are most vulnerable.'
"And they said it's just not possible."
How the royal drama unfolded since 'Megxit'
The couple continued to make waves even after leaving the UK for the US:
Harry and Meghan's security plans a 'private matter', says Burnham: full report
Sussexes will have to win over public
The duke and duchess may also have to win over the British public, since they face low approval ratings in royal favourability polls.
Former BBC royal correspondent Jennie Bond said retaining their other properties appeared to suggest the Sussexes were "testing the water" with the move.
The Sussexes are keeping their homes in Montecito, California; and Portugal, while the duchess will continue to run her lifestyle brand, As Ever, from their new base.
Meghan's net approval rating in the UK slipped to minus 43 in the second quarter of 2026 in a poll last month, her lowest yet in that system of measurement.
According to YouGov ratings, the Duchess of Sussex was liked by 18 percent and disliked by 61 percent in the three months from April to June, down from the first quarter when she was liked by 26 percent and disliked by 47 percent, a net approval of minus 21.
Hard truths about the 'Disneyland' Cotswolds that Harry and Meghan should know
By long-term resident Julian Linley:
'Return can't happen if keeping us safe is impossible' - Harry in 2023
In December 2023, in a witness statement read to the High Court during his legal challenge against the Home Office, the duke wrote: "The UK is my home. The UK is central to the heritage of my children and a place I want them to feel at home as much as where they live at the moment in the US.
"That cannot happen if it's not possible to keep them safe when they are on UK soil.
"I cannot put my wife in danger like that and, given my experiences in life, I am reluctant to unnecessarily put myself in harm's way too."