Ainsley Maitland-Niles scored a dream stoppage-time equaliser on his Everton debut to earn a 2-2 draw against Manchester United and lift the mood at the end of a difficult week.
Deadline day ended in disappointment for fans of both clubs but the Toffees' inaction was particularly concerning given Tuesday's botched business left them with a threadbare squad to tackle the Premier League and an unhappy manager.
David Moyes admitted he had "to live with disappointments" and called for Everton players to "muck in", but Sunday looked set to end in further frustration after substitute Benjamin Sesko's 88th-minute header put United on course for a late victory.
Tyrique George's thunderous strike had cancelled out a fine Bryan Mbeumo effort moments earlier but the Slovenia international would not prove United's match-winning substitute for the second time at Hill Dickinson Stadium this year. Instead, deadline-day acquisition Maitland-Niles came off the bench to rifle home from distance to snatch a dramatic late point and spark bedlam.
Relive all the action from the Premier League clash with our live blog below:
'Maitland-Niles was worth the wait for Everton fans'
Here's the Sky Sports pundit panel analysing Ainsley Maitland-Niles' late equaliser
Arsenal face Chelsea
As ever, things move quickly in the Premier League. We're straight on to the next game as reigning champions Arsenal host high-flying Chelsea in a potential title race clash?
That game has just got underway and you can follow here:
WATCH: Maitland-Niles' stunning late equaliser
Here's that moment where Ainsley Maitland-Niles snatched a point. A stunning strike
FULL-TIME! Everton 2-2 Man Utd
Her are some of the photos from that Maitland-Niles equaliser...
Maitland-Niles: 'It felt like a win'
"It felt like a win. We dug deep and managed to get a point in the end. The crowd were with us and we were fighting to the end and that's why you get those results," says Maitland-Niles on Sky after the full-time whistle.
"It's amazing, everyone wants to start off like that and thankfully I did. The ball fell to me on the edge of the box, I put my foot through it and it ended up in the top corner which I'm happy about.
"I came in to work hard. It's a team full of hard-workers so I fit right in. I'm going to show I can fit right in and pull my weight and give as much as everyone else, if not more," he added.
FULL-TIME! Everton 2-2 Man Utd
"The point gives you a massive lift if you're Everton. There are players out there capable of living with the best teams. They will battle, and they will work with each other," says former Everton winger pat Nevin on BBC 5 Live.
"In the end, there are going to be injuries. Can you imagine if Jack Grealish picks up another injury? He came on and completely changed the game," he added.
FULL-TIME! Everton 2-2 Man Utd
Two points dropped for Man Utd in what was another disappointing showing in reality. Michael Carrick's changes were surprising and though Sesko made sense as he scored, the visitors ultimately paid the price in what was a pedestrian performance.
As for Everton, that result will raise the mood on Merseyside, and there'll be hope that more can be achieved once their summer signings are fit. Grealish in particular was impressive after coming on.
FULL-TIME! Everton 2-2 Man Utd
"It is beautiful, as soon as he hit it it was going in, what a finish to this game and the 'keeper had no chance," says Lee Hendrie on Sky as the game ends.