Sir Keir Starmer has promised he will give his "wholehearted support" to Andy Burnham.
In an emotional PMQs for the outgoing PM's final session, Starmer gave a heartfelt thanks to Kemi Badenoch for privately supporting him during tough period.
He told MPs: "We have had robust exchanges across this Dispatch Box, but she has extended kindness to me privately and at very difficult times."
The Tory leader closed her final exchange with the PM by thanking his family for the "love and support they have given him" throughout his premiership.
Both Starmer and Badenoch paid tribute to Ann Widdecombe, as Starmer told MPs he was "truly horrified" by the murder of the former Tory minister.
"She was a distinguished politician with deep convictions (and a) vivid and fearless character," he told MPs.
He said it was chilling that during his own 11 years in the Commons, three serving or former MPs have been murdered.
On Tuesday, Mr Burnham said a "serious review" was needed into MPs' security following the killing.
Labour MP cries as she pays tribute to Keir Starmer in the Commons
Whitehall editor Kate Devlin reports:
Labour MP Carolyn Harris was in tears as she asked Starmer his last ever question at PMQs.
She told the House of Commons that because of the Labour leaders' "service and his leadership, children are growing up in a fairer Britain.
"We stand tall on the world stage, and every day we see his decency and his courage shine through."
On a personal note, she added: "Can I thank him and his wonderful family on behalf of me and my family for their cherished friendship? And I am certain everyone will join me in wishing him and his family the very, very best for their next chapter."
'This is the end of my political journey': Starmer bows out
Sir Keir Starmer has delivered his final speech in the Dispatch Box: "Every PM knows when thye take up the torch, the day will come when they ahve to pass it on.
"This is the end of my political journey.
"In six years we went from historic defeat in 2019, to historic victory in 2024.
"In two years in government, I leave the country in better shape than I found it. I am proud of everything we have achieved."
Ed Davey says Burnham's plan for the nation's debt is 'to infinity and beyond'
Liberal Democrat leader Ed Davey plays with Toy Story metaphor for Andy Burnham's incoming premiership.
Mr Davey said: "As the prime minister finds himself with more time on his hands, can I recommend the new Toy Story film?
"For those of you who don't know, Toy Story, its main character, used to be in law enforcement, but was mainly known for being little wooden, but was replaced by shiny new action figure from far away who thinks he can fly, and the name Andy on everyone's lips.
"Perhaps, Mr Speaker, maybe the prime minister should give that a miss. But does he share my fear that when it comes to Britain's national debt, [Andy Burnham's] plan is to infinity and beyond?"
Watch: Reeves appears emotional sitting next to Starmer in his final PMQs
Starmer and Davey share bizarre back and forth about going to Chessington World of Adventures together
Political correspondent Millie Cooke reports:
Sir Keir Starmer and Sir Ed Davey have had a bizarre back and forth where they joked about going to Chessington World of Adventures together.
The prime minister joked that the Liberal Democrat leader, who is known for doing adventurous stunts as part of his political campaigning, is "fittingly, the Right Honourable member for Chessington World of Adventures".
He added: "When he talks about the economy, I'm pleased to tell him that thanks to our summer savings his family can save nearly £20 when they visit this summer."
Responding, Sir Ed said: "Can I invite the prime minister to join me at Chessington World of Adventures?
"Closing out the bizarre exchange, the outgoing prime minister joked that the pair could go during Andy Burnham's first PMQs.
"He asked me about joining him at Chessington world of adventures, can I suggest 12 noon on the first Wednesday in September?", Sir Keir said.
PM shares hilarious viral moment which got him into 'a lot of trouble' with the headteacher
The prime minister shared a hilarious and humbling viral moment he had in a school earlier this year, which led him to a stern scolding by the headteacher.
Sir Keir Starmer said he "got into a lot of trouble at a primary school when an eight-year-old encouraged me to do the 6-7 thing" leading to the whole class copying the trend.
He said the headteacher "sternly" told him it was against school rules, to which the PM admitted he was "totally pathetic".
"I simply said, 'I didn't start it!'"
Starmer thanks Badenoch for the personal kindness she has shown him
Whitehall editor Kate Devlin reports:
The PM praised the Tory leader as he told MPs: "We have had robust exchanges across this Dispatch Box, but she has extended kindness to me privately and at very difficult times.
"Including when there was an attempt to burn down our family home, which deeply affected my family, she reached out to me.
"And when my brother died of cancer, she reached out to me privately... and I thank her for that and the tribute that she's just made to my wife and children, who mean the world to me."
Analysis: Kemi Badenoch finally gets the tone right
Political editor David Maddox writes:
Kemi Badenoch has managed to hold back on her natural inclination to go for the kill with her political opponents and given Sir Keir Starmer the friendly send off he has perhaps earned after two years as prime minister.
Her final question in particular paying tribute to the sacrifice that Sir Keir's wife Victoria and children have made for his political career along with her good wishes seemed genuinely heartfelt.
It was a rare moment of graciousness in the Commons chamber where the cut and thrust of politics is normally pretty brutal.
We can expect usual service to be resumed in September when Ms Badenoch will be facing a different prime minister - Andy Burnham.
Badenoch thanks Starmer's family for their 'love and support' during his premiership
Kemi Badenoch has closed her final exchange with the PM by thanking him and his family for their "sacrifice".
She said: "This is my last exchange with the right honourable gentlemen. I know how much his wife and children mean to him and they are in the gallery today.:
The Tory leader thanked Starmer's wife and children for their "love and support they have given him" throughout his premiership.
Starmer pledges to help Burnham in private - and be silent in public
Whitehall editor Kate Devlin reports:
Asked for his advice for the next PM, Sir Keir told MPs: "I will give my wholehearted support to my successor. I want this Labour government to be a success. I want our country to be a success."
And he promised: "I shall give my support privately if asked for - not publicly when not asked for."