Today's best Ancestry discount codes and offers
Ancestry DNA is designed to offer users more information on their ancestral roots, with a combination of advanced technology and the world's largest online family history resource. The genetic test kit landed the top spot in our expert round-up of the best DNA testing kits, where it was praised for finding and predicting relatives better than any other option we tested. Our team of deal hunters has been working hard to source the best Ancestry DNA discount codes and offers - here's our pick of the best.
How we find the best Ancestry discount codes
Our consumer experts are committed to bringing you the best deals, and are always on the lookout for ways to help you save on your next purchase - whether that's on DNA testing kits or any of our other tried-and-tested products. We track the prices of products throughout the year so that we can bring you the best possible deals.
Ways to save at Ancestry DNA tests
AncestryDNA offers
One of the most popular promotions at Ancestry is sales on its DNA kits. You can save upwards of 50 per cent during various periods of the year, such as Black Friday, Christmas and bank holidays. Right now, you can save 55 per cent on all DNA kits.
Keep in mind that such offers are not always visible on the Ancestry website. We often receive special links that direct you to exclusive discounts, so we'll be sure to keep you in the loop about these.
Free trials
All Ancestry memberships come with a free 14-day trial. It's the perfect way to test if a membership is right for you. You will receive full access to census data, parish records, connect with other members and build your family tree during this period.
The free trial requires you to provide your card details upon signing up, and the paid membership will begin if you fail to cancel before the 14-day trial ends.
AncestryDNA family deals
With the Ancestry family bundle deal, you pay £80 (instead of £79) and get three months of the Ancestry Worldwide membership. This membership normally costs £49.99 for three months, but the AncestryDNA and family tree package brings this to only £1.
Similar to the free trial, this membership will automatically renew after the three-month promotional period.
12-month memberships
Ancestry recently phased out its six-month membership and replaced it with one that lasts 12-months. Prices start from £95.99 and go up to £179.99 on annual memberships, saving you up to £59 compared to a monthly membership.
Friend referrals
When you refer a friend, they'll get an Ancestry coupon code for 15 per cent off their DNA kit. You'll receive an email 30 to 45 days after their purchase that contains a £10 Amazon gift card. Visit the DNA referral page and you'll receive a link that you can share.
Helpful membership information
Ancestry membership types
Before deciding the length of your Ancestry membership, you first need to decide which one you need. Here are the three membership plans and how they compare:
Essentials membership (UK records only)
- UK civil registration and census records (1841-1911)
- Build, preserve, and share your family tree
- Upload photos, stories, and documents to your tree
- 'Ancestry Hints' to help expand your tree
- Connect with other Ancestry members to ask for help & make discoveries
- Price: £10.99 monthly or £95.99 annually
Premium membership (All UK and Ireland records)
Includes everything in the Essentials membership, plus:
- Millions of military, immigration, and Irish records
- Parish records dating back to the 1500s
- Price: £13.99 monthly or £119.99 annually
Worldwide membership
Includes everything in Premium membership, plus:
- Access to more than three billion international birth, marriage, death, census, military, church and other records from more than 80 countries
- Price: £19.99 monthly or £179.99 annually
Get a gift membership
There is also the option to treat a loved one to an Ancestry gift membership. These are a one-time, non-renewing membership, so are helpful for those who don't intend to extend their plan but would forget to cancel a standard Ancestry membership.
AncestryDNA vs DNA + Traits
Normal DNA kits provide your origins and ethnicity, as well as DNA matches to other members. The new AncestryDNA + Traits feature shares information on more than 75 physical and behavioural traits, based on genetic predispositions. This extra feature costs £15 more than the normal kit and excludes you from the three-month Worldwide membership.
FAQs
Where can I apply my Ancestry discount code?
Look for the 'Have a coupon' link in the order summary under add-ons and above the payment methods. You will need to click it for a box to appear. Paste the code and apply it for instant savings.
Does Ancestry have DNA updates?
Yes, with the last one taking place in October 2025. Highlights of this update included 24 new regions, 54 subregions in Europe and 64 ethnic groups in Africa. According to its blog, a 2026 DNA update is coming soon.
Why you can trust us
The Independent is dedicated to helping its readers shop smart, so we only bring you deals from brands that we love and trust - with as many tried and tested reviews as possible. To sift through the noise, our team of deal hunters use their expertise to find the best savings on the latest trends, bestsellers and worthwhile investments.
Looking for more ways to save? Check out our dedicated deals section