Lewis Hamilton believes he can no longer catch Kimi Antonelli in the F1 world championship race after a day of disappointment at the Italian Grand Prix.
Hamilton had high hopes of a strong showing at Ferrari's home race but dropped down the order from fourth on lap one after a tangle with his teammate Charles Leclerc, who then crashed out a lap later.
The Briton recovered to fourth but was then short of pace after his team opted not to pit him during a mid-race VSC [virtual safety car] period and ultimately finished sixth - behind both McLarens of Lando Norris and Oscar Piastri.
Mercedes' Kimi Antonelli claimed a sensational victory from 19th on the grid to extend his mighty lead in the standings. Hamilton now trails the 20-year-old Italian by 76 points with 10 rounds remaining.
Follow live coverage of the Italian Grand Prix with The Independent
Lewis Hamilton concedes 2026 F1 title after Italian Grand Prix: 'It's too late'
Lewis Hamilton believes he can no longer catch Kimi Antonelli in the F1 world championship race after a day of disappointment at the Italian Grand Prix.
Hamilton had high hopes of a strong showing at Ferrari's home race but dropped down the order from fourth on lap one after a tangle with his teammate Charles Leclerc, who then crashed out a lap later.
The Briton recovered to fourth but was then short of pace after his team opted not to pit him during a mid-race VSC [virtual safety car] period and ultimately finished sixth - behind both McLarens of Lando Norris and Oscar Piastri.
Mercedes' Kimi Antonelli claimed a sensational victory from 19th on the grid to extend his mighty lead in the standings. Hamilton now trails the 20-year-old Italian by 76 points with 10 rounds remaining.
'It's very emotional': Michael Schumacher tribute paid by brother Ralf ahead of Italian Grand Prix
Ralf Schumacher paid a glowing tribute to his brother Michael on an Italian Grand Prix weekend where Ferrari are honouring their most successful Formula 1 driver.
This season represents 30 years since Michael, six-and-a-half years older than fellow F1 driver and brother Ralf, made his debut for the Scuderia, a team he went on to win five consecutive world championships with.
Both Lewis Hamilton's and Charles Leclerc's cars will adorn Schumacher's logo and seven stars on the chassis to represent Schumacher's title tally - a feat only matched by Hamilton. On Sunday, Sebastian Vettel will also drive a "celebratory" lap in Schumacher's title-winning 2002 car.
Full story below:
Why was George Russell booed at the Italian Grand Prix?
George Russell was booed by the Italian fans as home hero Kimi Antonelli claimed an improbable victory at Monza on Sunday.
Antonelli became the first Italian winner at Monza in 60 years with a sensational drive from 19th on the grid to first at the chequered flag.
The 20-year-old, on fresher tyres, overtook Russell in the closing stages to claim his seventh win of the season and extend his lead in the world championship to 66 points over his Mercedes teammate.
Carlos Sainz, who finished 13th:
"First of all, happy to see Charles unharmed after such a big accident. On our side, we executed a good race today and a strong weekend overall given our limitations. We put together a solid qualifying yesterday and had a good start and race pace today.
"Boxing under the VSC got us ahead of Ocon with a great pit stop from our mechanics and good pace allowed us to overtake Bearman at the end. I'm now very much looking forward to Madrid next weekend."
Ferrari boss Fred Vasseur:
"We knew that this race would be challenging, especially in terms of our top speed, and that made it difficult for Lewis to fight and overtake the cars around him. Regarding Charles, on the second lap he was side by side with Oscar (Piastri) going into the last corner and went slightly onto the dirty side of the track, which was enough for him to lose the car and hit the barriers. It was a big impact, so the most important thing is that Charles is okay.
"Of course, we are disappointed that we could not give our tifosi the result we wanted after the incredible energy and support they have shown us throughout the weekend. I'm very happy for Kimi (Antonelli): this is a very important moment for him, and he deserves it. Our focus now immediately switches to next weekend and the new Madrid circuit."
RACE REPORT: Kimi Antonelli claims sensational Monza victory from P19 as George Russell misses out again
Kimi Antonelli dealt a seismic blow to George Russell's hopes of taking the F1 world championship by passing his Mercedes teammate with just three laps remaining to win the Italian Grand Prix after he started 19th on the grid.
Home favourite Antonelli, who was way down the order after a grid penalty, took advantage of a favourable strategy, an explosive new engine and a demonstration of passing excellence, to become the first Italian in 60 years to win in Monza.
Full report below:
Lewis Hamilton concedes F1 championship
Should you have pitted? "One of the harder ones to swallow today, was hoping for more. But yeah... I gave it absolutely everything, just didn't have the speeds on the straights, was a sitting duck.
"We'll look internally into what we could have done better, we probably should have been on the hard tyre but we also had to be overtaking people. I thought they'd stop us, they didn't, and I ran out of tyres."
On prioritisation in team: "Yeah, too far past that already. Too late for that now. I lost a lot of points today; they're just ahead. We'll do our best to keep pushing the rest of the seaosn, they're out ahead now."
Charles Leclerc after his crash:
"Went on power, didn't feel like the car was quite alright, lost the car, need to look at the data.
"For the start, not much to say, Lewis tried to overtake, there wasn't much space, kept it tight into turn two."
Kimi Antonelli after his win:
"I woke up this morning and I felt very good mentally, I thought a good result would've been podium, after the red flag I was already P12, then top-five and I knew I had a shot for the win. It was difficult to break away, we managed to pull it off and bring it home.
Championship, yours to lose? "No not at all, race by race, you never know what can happen, today went well, we had a massive opportunity and we took it. Madrid is a new challenge, new track for everyone, important to be on point. Will enjoy this moment then focus on the next one."
Max Verstappen after finishing third:
"Some good battles out there, had to send it around the outside a lot.
In general, top speed wasn't our friend today. Tried to hang in there, they were a bit too fast, tried to be in overtake mode. Tried to do my own race.
"I had one tricky moment in turn 2 and the tarmac was opening up. Makes quite a big difference around here; happy with P3."