The head of the CIA told his Russian counterpart to make a deal with Ukraine as Moscow's position deteriorates during a secretive visit this week, according to a report.
US officials told the New York Times that CIA director John Ratcliffe presented FSB chief Aleksandr Bortnikov with evidence of the enormous price Russia has paid for relatively small gains in Ukraine, attributed to Kyiv's "mastery" of drone technology.
The CIA boss urged that Russia should enter serious negotiations with Ukraine to end the war given their difficulties on the ground and mounting economic woes, the sources claimed in comments to the newspaper.
Mr Ratcliffe flew to Russia on Tuesday to meet briefly with his intelligence counterparts in the first visit by a CIA director since 2021, when William Burns warned Russia against sending troops into Ukraine.
Two sources familiar with the matter told Reuters that Ratcliffe also brought up the possibility of a Russian operation against a Nato member and Russia's continued support for Iran during the meeting.
Russia nonetheless on Thursday warned that British military installations and equipment in and outside of Ukraine could be targeted in response to Ukrainian strikes on Russian territory carried out using British weapons, after the UK offered Kyiv access to technology to make missiles.
Recap: What head of CIA told Russian counterpart on secretive visit to Moscow
The head of the CIA told his Russian counterpart to make a deal with Ukraine as Moscow's position deteriorates during a secretive visit this week, according to a report.
US officials told the New York Times that CIA director John Ratcliffe presented FSB chief Aleksandr Bortnikov with evidence of the enormous price Russia has paid for relatively small gains in Ukraine, attributed to Kyiv's "mastery" of drone technology.
The CIA boss urged that Russia should enter serious negotiations with Ukraine to end the war given their difficulties on the ground and mounting economic woes, the sources claimed in comments to the newspaper.
Mr Ratcliffe flew to Russia on Tuesday to meet briefly with his intelligence counterparts in the first visit by a CIA director since 2021, when William Burns warned Russia against sending troops into Ukraine.
Read the full story:
Trump must be pressed to hand over interceptor designs to Ukraine, says Gordon Brown
Ukraine is facing its "worst winter" since the conflict with Russian began, Gordon Brown has warned, as he called for Britain and other nations to press Donald Trump to do more to help the Eastern European nation.
The former prime minister said the US president should be pushed to allow Ukraine to produce Patriot interceptor missiles - saying these could help the country defend itself from Russian attacks.
Describing the conflict - which began when Vladimir Putin's forces invaded Ukraine in February 2022 - as being at a "critical moment", Mr Brown recalled how Mr Trump had previously "promised he would give the design for interceptors to Ukraine", but "hasn't yet done so".
Read the full story:
Ukraine says it stockpiled enough gas for winter season
Ukraine has stored 14.6 billion cubic metres of gas in underground storage, enough for the upcoming winter season, the country's energy minister said on Friday.
"Ukraine has stockpiled natural gas for the baseline scenario for getting through the winter," Denys Shmyhal said on the Telegram app.
Catch up: Moscow warns UK 'playing with fire' over plans to help Kyiv produce missiles
Russia has threatened Britain with retaliation after prime minister Andy Burnham vowed to provide Ukraine with access to technology to produce Storm Shadow missiles domestically.
Maria Zakharova, Russia's foreign ministry spokesperson, said that London was just "one step away" from becoming legally complicit - in their eyes - for what she called "terrorism" against Russian civilians and warned of "inevitable catastrophic consequences" unless Britain changed course.
"We have repeatedly warned that any British military installations and equipment in Ukraine and beyond its borders could be targeted in response to Ukrainian strikes on Russian territory carried out using British weapons," she said.
Zakharova accused both the UK and France of "playing with fire" after France also agreed to supply long-range missile technology to Ukraine.
After the comments on Thursday, a spokesperson for Britain's ministry of defence said London stood "shoulder to shoulder" with Ukraine and was committed to providing the equipment that Kyiv needed "to defend itself against Putin's illegal invasion".
In pictures: Aftermath of Russian strikes on Ukrainian shopping centre in Zaporizhzhia
Mapped: The UK military bases threatened by Russia as Kremlin rages over missiles for Ukraine
Russia has threatened to bomb UK military bases in its latest threat over Britain's support for Ukraine.
Britain has been told to back off on its hostile stance towards Ukraine by Russia's foreign ministry spokeswoman, Maria Zakharova, who said the UK risked taking the conflict to a new level.
She told the same Moscow news briefing earlier that Britain and France were "playing with fire" by supplying sensitive missile technology to Ukraine.
Read the full story:
Drone damages grocery store and health centre in Moscow region
A drone struck a grocery store of Russian retailer Magnit in the town of Pavlovsky Posad in the Moscow region, the governor of the Moscow region said on Friday.
The drone also shattered windows at a nearby health centre but the centre remains open, governor Andrei Vorobyov said on Telegram.
At least two injured in drone attacks at occupied Zaporizhzhia power plant, says UN nuclear watchdog
The UN's nuclear watchdog says it has been informed of three 'drone incidents' at the site of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant earlier this week.
The IAEA says that radiation levels at the site remain normal. One drone attack on 25 august reportedly occurred near the cooling pond, injuring two plant employees.
US Patriot missile stocks are 'beyond critical' in Europe due to Iran war, report says
The U.S. military is reportedly experiencing a "beyond critical" shortage of advanced missile interceptors in Europe, largely driven by President Donald Trump's war with Iran.
Citing a U.S. defense official in Europe and a NATO official, The Associated Press reported Thursday that the most concerning shortfall involves Patriot missile interceptors, raising concerns about vulnerabilities in NATO countries to a potential Russian attack.
The NATO official confirmed the low inventories of Patriots missile interceptors, which can shoot down Russia's high-speed ballistic missiles, among American and NATO forces in Europe. Both spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss sensitive military matters.
Industrial facility in Russia hit by Ukrainian drone debris
The industrial facility in Russia's Yaroslavl region was hit by Ukrainian drone debris, the local governor said on Friday.
One person was killed in the attack, and 27 people were injured, Mikhail Evrayev said in a Telegram post.