A California woman was shot dead in the street by a man who had stalked her for months, authorities say.
Shalini Thakur, 38, was shot dead by 22-year-old Rohit Rohit outside of a Panera Bread restaurant in Sacramento on September 8. Rohit, who officials say was living in the country illegally, arrived at the scene slightly before Thakur, before accosting her.
Then, as she ran away, Rohit shot Thakur several times before walking over to her body and shooting her in the head, the Sacramento County Sheriff's Office says.
Thakur was pronounced dead at the scene, with authorities using the Flock system to locate Rohit's car. Upon finding the vehicle, deputies tried to stop Rohit's car, with the driver slamming the brakes.
Deputies called out to Rohit several times before discovering him dead from an apparent self-inflicted gunshot wound, according to the sheriff's office.
An investigation into Rohit found that the suspect had been stalking and harassing Thakur since January. That month, the victim discovered an Apple AirTag under the hood of her vehicle.
In another incident, Rohit deflated the air from Thakur's vehicle before following her to work so he could extend an offer of help.
Sudesh Kumari, Thakur's mother, told ABC 7 News that her daughter had repeatedly gone to the authorities about Rohit prior to the shooting.
"She could have been saved," Kumari said. "She told (sic) police so many times. She called them, but nobody did anything."
The sheriff's office says that Thakur initially declined to pursue charges or obtain a restraining order, even after Rohit obtained a key to her apartment and entered the home while she was sleeping. In the morning, he claimed he had been concerned about her.
In May, authorities urged Thakur to seek a restraining order, with the victim eventually agreeing - only for the sheriff's office to receive a report for a restraining order violation on July 29. That day, Thakur said that Rohit dropped off random grocery items at her door.
Court documents obtained by KCRA stated that Rohit and Thakur met at work, with Rohit picking up DoorDash orders from the business where she worked.
The Department of Homeland Security told ABC 7 News that Rohit entered the U.S. from India in 2023 and was in the country illegally. He was arrested by Border Patrol and released.
"That was a normal process, especially because he was coming from India," Immigration attorney Raissa Morris told the outlet. "If he had been coming from Mexico, it would be something else, but he was coming so far away that usually what they do is release them and allow them to go to court."
A spokesperson for DoorDash told CNN that he had signed up to work for the company using a Social Security number and that he had completed necessary background checks. However, he had not worked in more than six weeks.
Video footage of the shooting was released by Sacramento County Sheriff Jim Cooper. In the blurry footage, a male figure can be seen with a hand outstretched as another figure runs past.
Then, as the victim falls to the ground, the male figure stands over her body with a gun pointed at her head.
A funeral for Thakur was held on Monday, with her mother and uncle being the only immediate family in attendance since many of her relatives live in India, CBS News reported.
The Independent has contacted the DHS and DoorDash for comment.