Liam Neeson was pictured holding hands with his co-star Stella Stocker at the 2026 Toronto International Film Festival on Saturday.
The Irish actor was last linked to Baywatch star Pamela Anderson, who confirmed in December last year that the pair "were romantically involved for a short while" after filming The Naked Gun (2025) together.
Neeson and English actor Stocker, who star in the upcoming action thriller The Mongoose together, attended the Canadian festival's premiere of Courteney Cox's new film Evil Genius. Stocker was seen stroking Neeson's arm and clasping his hand in footage captured by People.
The Independent has contacted Stocker and Neeson's representatives for comment.
The two actors have previously shared the screen in two 2022 films, Memory and Marlowe.
Neeson is 74, while Stocker's age is not publicly listed.
According to her official website, Stocker lives in London, is bilingual (English and German) and grew up in Germany, France and the Congo.
Her other recent credits include the 2023 ITV series Archie (in which she played Audrey Hepburn), 2022's The Batman (in which she played Bruce Wayne's mother, Martha) and Blithe Spirit (2020).
It comes around a year after Neeson and Anderson sparked dating rumors while promoting The Naked Gun after Neeson said he was "madly in love" with The Last Showgirl star.
In the December interview with People, Anderson, 59, revealed she spent an intimate weekend with Neeson at his home in upstate New York, where she had her own room.
The pair "went to dinner at a tiny French restaurant where he introduced me as the 'future Mrs. Neeson,'" she said.
"We were having fun," she continued, describing their connection as "a little bit like a Nancy Meyers film."
"I always was laughing when people thought, 'Oh, that's a publicity stunt.' I'm like, 'A publicity stunt? This is real. We have real feelings.'"
"I adore Liam," she added, "but we are better friends, in full honesty."
Neeson was previously married to Gothic star Natasha Richardson, with whom he had two sons, Micheál and Daniel.
Richardson died in March 2009 from a head injury following a skiing accident in Quebec. She was 45 years old.
After Natasha's death, the Taken star was reported to be dating business executive Freya St Johnston, with the pair separating after two years in 2012. St Johnston is said to be the only person Neeson has dated seriously since the tragedy.
Asked by People magazine in 2024 whether he was involved with anyone, Neeson replied: "No, in a word. I'm past all that."