Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
George Russell said he is ready to capitalise on Kimi Antonelli's shock qualifying crash by winning from pole position in Azerbaijan on Saturday and ignite his world title comeback.
Antonelli, who has reigned supreme so far this season - winning eight of the 14 F1 rounds staged to secure an 81-point lead - displayed the first dent in his championship armour when he misjudged the opening corner and hit the wall in Baku.
The Q1 accident meant Antonelli could play no further part to leave him 16th on the grid.
Russell had all but written off his championship chances but Antonelli's demise, coupled with his impressive pole lap - the British driver was nearly nine tenths quicker than anyone else - will provide him with a glimmer of hope that the fight remains on.
Follow live updates from the Azerbaijan Grand Prix
Norris drops (Lap 3/51)
Norris loses fourth to Hadjar on the main straight, before Verstappen takes the Briton at the next corner!
A nightmare few corners for the reigning world champion - he's down to sixth.
Out in front, Russell has a comfortable two-second lead.
Top-10: Russell, Piastri, Leclerc, Hadjar, Verstappen, Norris, Hamilton, Gasly, Colapinto, Lawson
Antonelli drops to P17 (Lap 2/51)
Ultra caution from the Italian?
He's actually dropped a spot at the start and is down in 17th behind Nico Hulkenberg.
Meanwhile, Lando Norris surges past Isack Hadjar at the home straight, he's up to fourth.
And then Max Verstappen takes Lewis Hamilton for sixth down the inside of turn 3!
Piastri up to second
Terrific start from the McLaren, who charges into turn 1 in second ahead of Leclerc!
Russell got away very well - comfortably in first!
And Verstappen is up to sixth!
They're all through cleanly...
Formation lap
Interesting tyre choices unveiled as Russell leads the 22-car pack away for the formation lap.
Russell starts on the mediums, with Leclerc, Piastri and Hadjar behind him on softs.
Norris mediums, Hamilton softs. Antonelli back in P16 is on mediums.
What will happen here?!
A reminder of today's starting grid:
1. George Russell (Mercedes)
2. Charles Leclerc (Ferrari)
3. Oscar Piastri (McLaren)
4. Isack Hadjar (Red Bull)
5. Lando Norris (McLaren)
6. Lewis Hamilton (Ferrari)
7. Pierre Gasly (Alpine)
8. Max Verstappen (Red Bull)
9. Franco Colapinto (Alpine)
10. Ollie Bearman (Haas)
11. Liam Lawson (Racing Bulls)
12. Alex Albon (Williams)
13. Esteban Ocon (Haas)
14. Carlos Sainz (Williams)*
15. Arvid Lindblad (Racing Bulls)
16. Kimi Antonelli (Mercedes)
17. Gabriel Bortoleto (Audi)
18. Nico Hulkenberg (Audi)
19. Sergio Perez (Cadillac)
20. Valtteri Bottas (Cadillac)
21. Fernando Alonso (Aston Martin)**
22. Lance Stroll (Aston Martin)**
*Sainz was given a five-place grid drop for speeding under yellow flag conditions
**Both Aston Martins start at back of the grid after taking new engine components
Azerbaijan Grand Prix coming right up
So, what have you got for us Baku?
George Russell starts on pole for the first time since Austria in June - and that was his last win too. Can he get his title challenge back on track today?
There's a very good opportunity to take a chunk out of Kimi Antonelli's 81-point lead, with the Italian starting in 16th. How quickly can he move up the order?
And what about Ferrari, McLaren and Red Bull? Leclerc is in P2, with Piastri P3 and Hadjar an impressive P4.
Oscar Piastri, who starts P3:
"We looked pretty good on Thursday so hopefully we can keep that going but I think to be quick by yourself is one thing; to be able to overtake people is another, so we'll see what we get.
"I'm expecting George to drive off into the distance and I think we'll be looking at Kimi in our mirrors pretty quickly."
Ferrari boss Fred Vasseur:
"Even if you're in front at end of lap one, might not be in front at start of lap two... we'll just see at the end!"
Time for the Azerbaijan national anthem
Genuinely one of my favourite anthems on the calendar!