Rangers host Celtic in the Scottish League Cup quarter-finals and the first meeting of the Old Firm this season. But there will be no away fans at Ibrox following the shocking scenes that followed last season's Scottish Cup quarter-final between the teams.
There is a change in the dugout this season with Derek McInnes taking charge of Rangers, after he led Hearts to the brink of the title only to be denied by Celtic at the end of last term.
McInnes has steadied the ship at Rangers after a difficult start, while Martin O'Neill's team have started the campaign with seven consecutive wins domestically, although both sides have made an absolute mess of Europe.
Celtic were denied the League Cup following a shock defeat to St Mirren in last year's final but they went on to win both the Premiership and the Scottish Cup.
Follow live updates from Rangers v Celtic, below
Cameron Carter-Vickers discusses this afternoon's clash
Celtic centre-back Cameron Carter-Vickers has been chatting to Premier Sports ahead of kick-off
WATCH: Fans clash on pitch after Celtic knock Rangers out of cup on penalties
Here's the reason why there are no away fans at Ibrox today. The carnage that occurred during the the Scottish Cup clash between the sides last season
Preparations underway at Ibrox
Excitement is building for the first Old Firm of the season as Ibrox gets ready
BBC rules Pat Nevin's punch claim during Celtic pitch invasion 'fell below editorial standards'
Pat Nevin's comments during a pitch invasion in Celtic's 3-1 victory against Hearts on the final day of the William Hill Scottish Premiership season "fell below editorial standards of accuracy", the BBC has concluded.
Nevin had already apologised after claiming "two or three" Celtic supporters had punched Hearts captain Lawrence Shankland during live co-commentary for BBC Radio 5 Live.
The former Scotland winger was detailing chaotic scenes at Celtic Park as home fans flooded the pitch to celebrate Callum Osmand's decisive goal, which helped the Hoops secure the title. His remarks prompted complaints from listeners and, following a BBC inquiry, were determined to be incorrect. He apologised for his mistake last month in his BBC newsletter.
Celtic team news
Here's how Celtic will line up today.
A bit of a surprise in that the impressive Haissem Hassan has been dropped, with Sebastian Tounekti preferred. Tounekti isn't necessarily universally popular with Celtic fans...
Tounekti is likely to play on the left, with Camilo Duran on the right and record signing Kasper Hogh through the centre.
Sam Johnstone retains his place in goal ahead of Viljami Sinisalo after making his debut on Wednesday, Cameron Carter-Vickers is back in the heart of defence after missing out entirely in midweek and Kieran Tierney has also recovered from injury
Celtic XI: Johnstone; Donovan, Carter-Vickers, Scales, Tierney; McGregor, Baur Nygren; Duran, Hogh, Tounekti.
Rangers team news
Right, team news news has dropped. First up, here's Rangers, with Derek McInnes selecting his first Old Firm line-up.
The XI is more or less as expected, although Kevin Kelsy is preferred to Findlay Curtis out wide and Dan Neil captains the side from defensive midfield, with Cammy Devlin only on the bench. Ryan Naderi leads the line
Rangers XI: Pandur; Sterling, Fernandez, Makhanya, Penrice; Raskin, Neil; Kim, Gassama, Kelsy; Naderi
Olwethu Makhanya eager to experience Old Firm
Rangers defender Olwethu Makhanya, who signed from Philadelphia Union this summer has said he is relishing the opportunity to play in his first Old Firm.
The South African said: "I think everyone understands what this fixture means to the club, to the fans and everyone. I am really excited and looking forward to it.
"There has been a lot of talking about the fixture, about the history of the derby, but I don't really look into all that. I just know that it is going to be a very passionate game, and I am just excited to be part of it.
"Of course we just have to try and do our job and deliver because we know the fans are going to be behind us, so we are going to use them as an encouragement.
"Also understand that we are also doing it for them; they are going to be very helpful for us."
Martin O'Neill reveals 'timely reminder' given to Celtic by police
Ahead of this afternoon's clash, manager Martin O'Neill says Celtic had a visit from Police Scotland on Friday to give them "a timely reminder" about their "general behaviour" during the clash.
"We had the police come in today, just a little 15-minute meeting to remind us of our behaviour, which I think is a timely reminder," O'Neill revealed.
"They didn't mention this, but I would have assumed that one of the things that would be considered is what happens in the field of play, because these things can be taken further.
"You don't want any sort of punch-ups for a start. Secondly, you don't want excessive celebrations, stuff like that. But I think it's just the behaviour in the light of what has happened in recent fixtures. I think that the conversation with the police wouldn't have taken place had not recent events been brought up to us."
Why are away fans banned this afternoon?
Celtic and Rangers fans have been banned from attending away matches between the Old Firm clubs in the Scottish Premiership and Scottish League Cup this season, which includes this afternoon's Scottish League Cup quarter-final at Ibrox.
The "temporary arrangement" follows the disruption at the Scottish Cup quarter-final between the teams at Ibrox last season, which has led to behind-closed-doors punishments for both clubs in their next home fixture in that competition.
An independent review into the Scottish Cup match at Ibrox found that that "crushing" and "life-threatening violence" were narrowly avoided after Rangers fans stormed the pitch to confront Celtic supporters who had spilled onto the field in celebration.
Read a full explainer on the ban"
Early Celtic team news
Celtic's record signing Kasper Hogh made his return from injury in the 1-0 win at St Johnstone, while Kieran Tierney is nearing a return and could be back in time for the Old Firm.
Martin O'Neill made several changes in midweek, including handing a debut to goalkeeper Sam Johnstone over Viljami Sinisalo, while Cameron Carter-Vickers is expected to be available after being left out entirely on Wednesday
Celtic XI: Johnstone; Donovan, Carter-Vickers, Trusty, Tierney, McGregor, Baur, Nygren, Duran, Hogh, Yang