Long summer evenings in the garden with a nice glass of wine are nothing short of bliss. Whether you're hosting a BBQ or just relaxing after a long day, the right bottle of wine can make your evening perfect. And if you're looking for your next quality bottle to enjoy alfresco, you'll be pleased to know Naked Wines has launched a limited-time summer wine case that lets new customers get 12 bottles (worth £144.99) for just £69.99, bringing the cost down to less than £6 a bottle.
Founded in 2008, Naked Wines has helped make great wine more accessible by connecting customers directly with independent winemakers around the world. The retailer allows wine drinkers to discover high-quality bottles at affordable prices, while supporting smaller producers who might otherwise struggle to get their wines in front of a wider audience.
The wine service is hugely popular with sommeliers. Libby Brodie, a qualified wine consultant, told The Independent: "A massive point of difference when compared to other platforms and shops is the immediacy of contact with the actual winemakers themselves."
So how does it a Naked Wines membership work? You pay £25 a month into a wine account to spend on future orders, giving you access to a selection of independent wines at up to 33 per cent less than typical retail prices. If you don't enjoy a bottle you receive, you can get the credit back to try something new, while the brand's recommendations are tailored to your tastes.
"It cuts out the middleman and the winemakers love it as they get to know what people are actually loving (or not)," Brodie adds. "It makes the experience so much more informative and collaborative."
If you're yet to try Naked Wines, the brand is currently offering £75 off your first case. This impressive deal means you can sample 12 carefully curated bottles of premium wine for less than £6 each. This includes everything from a crisp sauvignon blanc to a fruity merlot, pale Provence rosé and more.
Once you've redeemed the offer, you'll automatically be signed up as a Naked Wines Angel. After 30 days, your first £25 instalment will be taken and you'll get access to member perks, including up to 33 per cent off bottles, tailored recommendations and a monthly free bottle when you order 12 bottles. There are no tie-ins, and you can cancel at any time.
Discover more expert wine recommendations in our guide to the best supermarket wines