President Donald Trump has shared a glimpse of the regilded Arts of War sculptures in Washington, D.C.
The two statues, another D.C. landmark in Trump's beautification effort, frame the entrance of Arlington Memorial Bridge and have stood since 1951.
In images shared on Truth Social, Trump showed off the statues' gleaming gold coating, a color favored by the president.
"Taking down the scaffolding around the regilded Arts of War sculptures," he captioned the post. Last month, Trump claimed that the statues would be fully regilded by July 3.
Sculpted by Leo Friedlander, the two Arts of War statues are named "Sacrifice" and "Valor."
The two statues, which are made from bronze and fire-gilded, last underwent major renovations in the 1970s. Smaller restorative efforts were also made in 1984 and 2005.
National Park Service documents obtained by NOTUS earlier this year stated that the huge statues would be covered in a layer of 23.75-karat gold leaf.
Early in June, the U.S. Department of the Interior posted on X that the restoration of the statues, as well as the Arts of Peace statues, was part of the department's "auramaxxing" effort ahead of the 250th anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of Independence.
A spokesperson for the department described the work on social media as "Longgggg overdue."
Government spending records at the time stated that a $5.1 million contract was handed to The Gilders' Studio to carry out the project.
Trump has repeatedly attempted to beautify parts of Washington, D.C. during his second presidency, with the Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool being one of the most recent landmarks to undergo major renovations at the commander-in-chief's behest.
The pool was drained and repainted an "American-flag blue," only for the site's water to later turn green from algae blooms and for chunks of the new lining to peel off.
That sparked another clash over Trump's attempts to remake D.C.'s landscape, as he blamed the damage on vandals.
The president has also said that a huge ceremonial arch will be constructed on Memorial Circle, near Arlington Memorial Bridge. The 250-foot arch has been nicknamed the "Arc-de-Trump."
Even the White House has undergone sweeping changes, with the president infamously bulldozing the East Wing to make way for his $600 million ballroom.