Manchester United have made a £60m bid for Carlos Baleba as they look to make the Brighton player their third midfield signing of the summer. United's offer, which could rise by £5m, means they have resurrected their interest in Baleba, a player they first targeted last summer. Brighton then valued the 22-year-old at over £100m, but were also reluctant to sell, but Baleba's price has dropped after a difficult year.
Elsewhere, Liverpool have entered into negotiations with Inter Milan about selling Curtis Jones to the Italian champions. The two clubs are yet to agree a deal but dialogue is ongoing as Inter have resumed their attempts to buy the midfielder. Liverpool would probably agree to a sum of around €35m (£30m) to let Jones move to San Siro. The Reds remani interested in Bradley Barcola after dropping their pursuit of his PSG's team-mate Ibrahim Mbaye.
Meanwhile, Arsenal have agreed to sign Ezri Konsa from Aston Villa for around £51m. Mikel Arteta was eager to bolster his defence after the serious injury to William Saliba and Jurrien Timber's return to fitness and a right-sided defender was highlighted as a priority for the Gunners as they bid to defend their Premier League title. The 28-year-old would likely compete with Cristhian Mosquera to deputise for Saliba alongside Gabriel Magalhaes and could make his debut against Aston Villa next week.
Finally, Tottenham are interested in Omar Marmoush as well as Savinho as they could make two signings from Manchester City. Savinho is a long-term target for Spurs, who considered a £50m move for the Brazilian winger last summer. But they are also keen on Marmoush as Roberto De Zerbi looks to strengthen his forward line and continue his expensive revamp of a squad who only just avoided relegation last season.
Follow all of the latest news, rumours and done deals below
ICYMI: Arsenal agree Ezri Konsa deal with Aston Villa to boost title defence
Arsenal have agreed to sign Ezri Konsa from Aston Villa for around £50m.
Mikel Arteta was eager to bolster his defence after the serious injury to William Saliba and Jurrien Timber's return to fitness.
There was an awareness that one more injury in this area of the pitch could leave the champions short.
Konsa, who featured for England during the World Cup this summer, is expected to undergo a medical in north London today.
The 28-year-old would likely compete with Cristhian Mosquera to deputise for Saliba alongside Gabriel Magalhaes and could make his debut against Aston Villa next week.
ICYMI: Liverpool and Inter Milan in talks over Curtis Jones deal
Liverpool have entered into negotiations with Inter Milan about selling Curtis Jones to the Italian champions.
The two clubs are yet to agree a deal but dialogue is ongoing as Inter have resumed their attempts to buy the midfielder.
The Times reports that Inter have now submitted a €30m (£26.7m) plus €5m in add-ons for the 25-year-old midfielder, who has one year left on his contract.
Liverpool would probably agree to a sum of around €35m (£30m) - the amount Inter recently paid Tottenham for Djed Spence - to let Jones move to San Siro.
ICYMI: Manchester United table bid for Carlos Baleba as midfield rebuild continues
Manchester United have made a £60m bid for Carlos Baleba as they look to make the Brighton player their third midfield signing of the summer.
They are yet to agree a deal, with Brighton thought to want a higher price for the Cameroon international, but talks are progressing.
The four unsolved problems threatening to derail Liverpool's season
Taking over an unfinished squad and an injury prone defence while tasked with fitting in last year's expensive signings and replacing Mohamed Salah means Andoni Iraola inherits many of the issues that plagued Arne Slot's second season, writes Richard Jolly.
Ranking every Premier League team before the most unpredictable season in years
Arsenal's strength and depth makes them our favourites to defend their title but who will challenge them?
The transfer reality holding Man United back from the next step under Michael Carrick
United have missed out on two of their top targets and look short of the firepower to outbid their rivals ahead of a first full campaign under Carrick and the ultimate aim to challenge for the title once more, writes Richard Jolly.
Mikel Arteta made Arsenal champions - here's how he can define a new Premier League era
With stability and squad depth the Gunners can capitalise on an unpredictable top-flight season and win back-to-back titles for the first time since 1935 says Miguel Delaney.
Tottenham set out Richarlison stance
With Tottenham pushing to sign both Omar Marmoush and Savinho from Manchester City, what about Richarlison?
Spurs want a sizeable fee if they are to sell Richarlison in this transfer window, The Standard reports.
The Brazilian has a year left on his contract with Spurs and is being linked with a move back to Everton.
Tottenham are said to hold the option to extend his contract for another year which gives them a bit of leeway to negotiate and avoid selling him for a lower than wanted offer.
The Brazilian finished as the club's top scorer last season but it is unclear how he will be utilised in the upcoming campaign by manager Roberto De Zerbi.
Especially if Tottenham add a couple of more new attacking players before the transfer window closes at the end of the month.
Crystal Palace reject approach for Ismaila Sarr?
Fabrizio Romano reports that Galatasaray have turned their attention to trying to sign Ismaila Sarr from Crystal Palace after being turned down by Arsenal's Gabriel Martinelli.
Romano reports that it would take a "huge, really huge" offer for Palace to consider selling the Senegal international winger at this point in the window
Man City continue selling, Tottenham continue buying?
Manchester City have already brought in around £160m this summer by selling Rodri, Tijjani Reijnders, James Trafford and Nathan Ake and that sum could rise if Marmoush and Savinho leave, while they are also in talks with Newcastle about a potential deal for Nico Gonzalez.
But, having broken their transfer record to buy Elliot Anderson from Nottingham Forest for £116m, they are set to spend heavily again in midfield as they look for replacements for Rodri and Reijnders. They are in talks with Lille over Ayyoub Bouaddi and are also interested in Chelsea's Enzo Fernandez.
Meanwhile, Tottenham have broken their transfer record twice to sign midfielders Mateus Fernandes, for £85m, and Sandro Tonali, for a fee rising to £100m.
They have also bought centre-back Jan Paul van Hecke from Brighton for £52m as well as bringing in fellow defenders Marcos Senesi and Andy Robertson on free transfers.
Spurs have brought in around £72m by selling defenders this week, with Cristian Romero joining Atletico Madrid, Djed Spence going to Inter Milan and Ashley Phillips moving to Middlesbrough.