Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
New footage shows chaotic scenes aboard a FlyDubai flight to Israel as passengers wrestled a man who attacked his co-pilot with an axe in a suspected hijacking.
Terrified people on the flight are seen speaking in a mixture of Hebrew and English as they call for a doctor and a pilot. Others shout "take him out" and "he tried to crash the plane" in the video shared by Israel's Channel 12 news.
The co-pilot who allegedly tried to hijack a flight to Israel on Wednesday attacked his fellow pilot with an axe, Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu claimed as questions loomed over the motives and background of the assailant.
It remains unclear how the pilot gained access to a weapon and some analysts have suggested it may have been the emergency axe kept in the cockpit in case of emergency.
Passenger Daniel Schlichter told Fox News on Thursday that the cabin was alerted to the attack by a woman and her daughter who saw the incident while heading to the lavatory.
Off-duty British pilot 'helped rescue plane' after alleged stabbing in cockpit
An off-duty British pilot helped rescue a passenger flight from Dubai to Israel after a pilot allegedly stabbed his colleague and tried to hijack the plane, a passenger has said.
The FlyDubai plane dropped from 33,000 feet to 17,000 feet (10,000 metres to 5,100 metres) in about a minute as passengers and crew subdued the alleged attacker.
Dozens of Omani pilots flew to Tel Aviv despite ban, says report
A ban on pilots from states without formal relations to Israel was not enforced appropriately, according to a report cited by the Times of Israel.
Under the law, pilots from nations including Oman, which does not have formal ties with Israel, were banned from flying but airlines and security agencies did not enforce the rule.
It comes as an unnamed Omani national was said to have attacked his Indian co-pilot on a FlyDubai flight from Dubai to Tel Aviv.
Air travel expert gives verdict on three key issues of the Flydubai plane hijacking
The alleged hijacking of an Israel-bound flight has raised questions over how secure the vetting process is for one of aviation's most skilled jobs.
Flydubai FZ1073 from Dubai to Tel Aviv rapidly descended during a terrifying ordeal as the co-pilot allegedly tried to take control of the plane after attacking his fellow pilot with an axe, or possibly stabbing him.
Watch: New footage shows bloodied Flydubai passengers rush to subdue pilot
Israel's Shin Bet had security concerns about UAE airports weeks before hijacking attempt: report
The head of Israel's security agency had raised security concerns about flights from the UAE for months before a pilot attempted to hijack a Flydubai passenger plane travelling to Tel Aviv, according to a report.
David Zini, the director of Israel's Shin Bet, had reportedly clashed with Israeli airlines over restrictions on flights to the UAE, with the agency reasoning that security measures at Emirati airports were insufficient, according to Israel's N12 News.
Israeli authorities were concerned with possible missile attacks or attacks at an airport, the outlet reported on Thursday. A scenario like Wednesday's hijacking attempt was "not raised in any discussion", they said.
Trump warns Tehran would be 'hit very hard' if FlyDubai attack linked to Iran
US president Donald Trump has warned that Iran would be "hit very hard" if it was found to have been involved in the attack.
Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu said pilots from countries without diplomatic relations with Israel were generally barred from flying there, raising questions over how the suspected Omani pilot was allowed on the Flydubai flight.
He said: "Obviously there was a loophole here and we're taking care of that among other things... with the full co-operation, I have to say, of the Emirati government, so we're both interested in making sure this doesn't happen again."
Oman, unlike the UAE, does not have formal diplomatic ties with Israel.
Asked whether there was evidence of Iranian involvement, Netanyahu said: "It's too early to say."
Watch: Flydubai pilot reveals desperate attempts to unlock cockpit to passengers while being attacked
Flydubai pilot tells India PM Modi he opened cockpit door while being attacked
An Indian pilot who was attacked in the FlyDubai flight incident told prime minister Narendra Nodi on Wednesday that he opened the door of the plane's cockpit while being attacked, according to a video clip released by the prime minister's office on Friday.
Watch: Netanyahu says Flydubai co-pilot underwent Islamist radical indoctrination
Israeli defence minister claims Flydubai cockpit attack 'jihadist terror attack'
Israeli defence minister Israel Katz has described the Flydubai cockpit incident as "a jihadist terrorist attack attempt".
Katz said in a statement: "The grave incident on the flydubai plane was a jihadist terrorist attack attempt, which was thwarted only thanks to the bravery of several Israeli passengers who broke into the cockpit, overpowered the terrorist and, with their own hands, restored control of the plane to another flight crew who was present there."
Israel's ambassador to the UN Danny Danon said that there was "no doubt" the pilot intended to bring the Tel Aviv-bound plane down.
"We have no doubt that it was a terror attack from a radical individual. We still cannot link it to a terror state or a terror organisation, but for sure we know that there was an intention to bring that plane down," he told Fox News.
He also described the incident as an attack on the Abraham Accords.