Donald Trump has criticised the "catastrophe" in the Spanish enclave of Ceuta, which has been dealing with the mass influx of 60,000 migrants from Morocco.
The US president told a cabinet meeting: "I saw Spain yesterday, and I watched the catastrophe that took place. It looks like an invasion of a country.
"Hundreds of thousands of people. And that same thing's going to happen to us if the Republicans don't get elected, except worse, much bigger, much easier to get into."
His comments echo others made by senior US officials, with the US department of state placing the blame on the socialist administration of Spanish prime minister Pedro Sánchez.
"This unacceptable incident is the direct result of the Spanish Government's deliberate efforts to enable and facilitate mass illegal migration into Europe," they said.
Meanwhile, Italy is suspending the EU's border-free Schengen arrangements with Spain, and has agreed to strengthen controls along the Franco-Italian land border to try to prevent any undocumented migrants from crossing.
Thousands of migrants have made the journey in the past few days, with Spanish troops deployed to battle the growing crisis on the border.
At least 57 people died while attempting to cross.
Ceuta, along with Melilla, another Spanish autonomous city in northern Morocco, represents the European Union's only land border with Africa.
Elon Musk compares crisis to 2013 zombie film 'World War Z'
Tech trillionaire Elon Musk shared a video comparing footage from the Ceuta migrant crisis with scenes from the 2013 zombie apocalypse movie 'World War Z'
In the 40-second clip, hundreds of zombies can be seen breaching a wall as terrified onlookers attempt to escape.
The former Trump adviser captioned the post: "Wow, the situation in Spain looks crazy!"
Clarifying the comparison was a joke, he then shared footage from 2023, showing hundreds of Venezuelan migrants attempting to cross into the US, captioning it: "This is what America looked like under Biden."
US state department blames Spanish government
The US department of state has been far more categorical in placing the blame directly at the hands of the Spanish government, as Donald Trump continues to lead a tense relationship with their prime minister Pedro Sanchez.
"This unacceptable incident is the direct result of the Spanish Government's deliberate efforts to enable and facilitate mass illegal migration into Europe. We are considering actions to defend Americans at home and abroad from this threat and stand ready to assist other European allies considering similar options," wrote the department.
'I just want a chance', says migrant who attempted crossing
When he heard the border had been breached, Abdulah Buji jumped on his motorbike and raced from his home in northern Morocco toward Ceuta, joining tens of thousands of people trying to swim into the tiny Spanish territory in North Africa.
Like many of his fellow countrymen, Buji was inspired by the thought that this collective crossing could somehow unlock his dream of reaching Spain and starting a new life in Europe.
"Spain gives you the chance to make your future, not like Morocco," said Buji, a 21-year-old who is studying to be a teacher. "I am a talented boy. I just want a chance."
But his elation at setting foot on Spanish soil was quickly followed by the disheartening realization that he was still far from his ultimate goal.
Mainland Europe rested across the Mediterranean, and he and the new arrivals were unwanted. Spanish authorities ordered everyone to turn around and go back or face eventual expulsion.
Buji said he almost joined more than 50 people who died trying to reach Ceuta while swimming around a border fence. He made it across, but he lost his belongings and money in the crossing.
When he realized that he would likely face legal limbo and detention, he turned around and headed back.
"I've spent perhaps 14 years studying, but there's nothing at home, and I'd have to work 12-hour shifts for a meager wage," Buji said. "That's why I came here, but I haven't found any opportunities here either, so I have to go back."
JD Vance claims crisis is result of 'radical left-wing globalist policies'
The US vice president has claimed that the migrant crisis in Cueta is a consequence of "radical left-wing globalist policies", in a criticism of Pedro Sanchez's government.
JD Vance wrote on X: "These images out of Spain are an unfortunate reminder of the consequences of mass migration and the radical left-wing globalist policies that have enabled the Invasion of the West."
Russia 'using Ceuta crisis to sow destabilisation' across Europe
Ukraine has accused Russia of carrying out an "intensive propaganda campaign" using pictures from Ceuta to "sow destabilisation".
Foreign minister Andrii Sybiha claimed that Ukrainian analysts have identified more than 1,500 publications on a pro-Russian network, led by Pravda and RT.
"For years, Moscow has used migration and other sensitive topics to stoke fear and destabilise European countries," he wrote on X.
Trump administration and House Speaker claim 'socialists are ruining Spain'
Both Donald Trump and the Republican Speaker of the House have weighed in on the crisis in Cueta, blaming the socialist Spanish government for weak immigration laws.
US House Speaker Mike Johnson said in a post on X: "THIS is Marxism in practice: open borders, eroded sovereignty, and unlawful migration on a massive scale.
"What's happening in REAL TIME in Spain is EXACTLY the future the radical Left envisions for America.
"The socialists are ruining Spain just as they would the US."
Meanwhile, the US president likened scenes of migrants crossing the border to an "invasion".
During a Cabinet meeting at the Camp David retreat in Maryland, he suggested the Spanish government "doesn't know what to do" due to "bad management".
Morocco 'facilitated migrant crossings' into Cueta
Morocco has been accused of facilitating the mass influx of 60,000 migrants to the Spanish enclave of Cueta, The Telegraph reports.
Western intelligence sources have said the incident could have been enacted as a punishment over diplomatic frustrations with Spain, who are pursuing gas deals with Algeria.
Morocco's relationship with socialist Spanish prime minister Pedro Sánchez is said to be strained, although Spanish officials played down these rumours.
In 2021, a similar incident occurred but on a lesser scale, with Morocco funnelling 8,000 people into the enclave during a dispute with Madrid over the sovereignty of the Western Sahara.
'There's nothing at home': Moroccans sought better future in collective crossing to Spanish territory
When 21-year-old Abdulah Buji heard that the border into Spain's North African enclave of Ceuta had been breached, he raced there on his motorbike, hoping the mass crossing would finally open a path to Europe.
"Spain gives you the chance to make your future, not like Morocco," the trainee teacher told the Associated Press.
Buji survived the dangerous swim into Ceuta, losing his belongings and money in the process, only to discover there was no route to mainland Spain.
Faced with the prospect of detention and eventual expulsion, he returned to Morocco.
"I've spent perhaps 14 years studying, but there's nothing at home," he said. "I just want a chance."
Europe faces border crisis as 60,000 migrants cross into Ceuta from Morocco in 24 hours: 'Absolute chaos'
Europe faces a fresh border crisis after around 60,000 migrants from Morocco crossed into the Spanish exclave of Ceuta in just 24 hours.
At least 57 people died as border security struggled to deal with the sudden influx, with extraordinary footage capturing the huge crowds making their way into Spain's North African territory.
What to know about the Spanish territory of Ceuta
Ceuta and the larger Spanish territory of Melilla, which is some 400km (250 miles) east, are located on the northern shores of the Mediterranean coast at the tip of Africa.
Both autonomous cities belong to Spain and share the European Union's only land borders with Africa.
In Spanish possession since 1580, Ceuta is home to a mixed population of Christians and Muslims, and Spanish and Moroccan residents and day workers who live in relative harmony.
Morocco does not officially recognise Ceuta and Melilla as Spanish territory, and often refers to them as occupied lands.
The city of 85,000 has been a flashpoint in major diplomatic crises in recent memory between Madrid and Rabat.
In May 2021, the Moroccan government dropped its border controls and let some 8,000 people from Morocco and sub-Saharan countries pour into Ceuta in just two days.
The move was broadly interpreted as retaliation from Morocco for Spain's decision to allow a pro-independence leader from the disputed Western Sahara region to receive medical treatment at a Spanish hospital.
Tensions were defused and the border restored only after Spain's prime minister shifted his country's long-standing position on Western Sahara, and met with Moroccan King Mohammed VI the following year.
Ceuta and its sister city Melilla are heavily fortified, as the territories are seen as a destination for those trying to reach Spain from Morocco and other parts of Africa.