Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
A new era for Scotland has arrived as Sebastien Pocognoli takes charge of his first match, against Slovenia in the Nations League.
The 39-year-old Belgian was something of a surprise replacement for Steve Clarke, who resigned after seven years at the helm following the Tartan Army's limp group-stage exit from the World Cup this summer.
Pocognoli is expected to shake things up as Scotland try to move away from the conservative team selections and style of play that defined the Clarke era and he's selected a new-look squad for this first international break, which has games against Slovenia, Switzerland and North Macedonia. His first starting XI sees debuts for Swansea defender Stephen Welsh and Sevilla striker Robbie Ure, while Hull City striker Oli McBurnie will make his first appearance since 2021.
The Scots have returned to League B of the Nations League and a clash with Slovenia at Stadion Stozice in Ljubljana will provide an intriguing first test for Pocognoli as he begins the build-up to Euro 2028, where Scotland will be co-hosts.
Follow all the action from Pocognoli's first game with our live blog below:
CROSSBAR! Slovenia 0-0 Scotland, 33 mins
Matko into the box on the right and lashes a shot at goal but it's not great and goes wide. He should probably do better.
Slovenia win a fifth corner, I think, already today shortly after. The delivery is much better and Drkusic rises highest but his header clatters off the bar! Couldn't quite direct it on target.
Plenty of food for thought for Pocognoli here.
Slovenia 0-0 Scotland, 29 mins
A third Slovenia corner of the match, with Scotland yet to have one, but that's wasted. They go short and Gnezda Cerin changes the angle but his cross bounces harmlessly through for a goal-kick.
Slovenia 0-0 Scotland, 27 mins
Nice pressing by Scotland to force their hosts into a tight spot and they force them into a defensive throw-in but it's well cleared.
Slovenia then counter and Hendry's back-pass is errant - out for a corner.
Slovenia 0-0 Scotland, 23 mins
Scotland yet to fashion a chance in this match. Robertson receives the ball in attacking position for the first time but the attack quickly breaks down. A few passes but no end product
Slovenia 0-0 Scotland, 19 mins
Scotland finally get a bit of possession, although it's all in their own half before McGinn wins a foul near-ish halfway. Having the ball for a bit, even if not in a particularly dangerous position, might do the Scots some good.
Slovenia 0-0 Scotland, 16 mins
All Slovenia so far and they win another corner. Sturm and Sporar both looking very lively in attack.
Ure again does his defensive duty well to head clear, although it wasn't a great corner, in truth.
CLOSE! Slovenia 0-0 Scotland, 14 mins
Slovenia probably should score. Scotland playing a high line but Sturm gets in behind down the left.
He puts a nice low cross in, Sorar gets ahead of his man six yards out but his flick flies wide of the far post. He really has to do better but Scotland survive, for now.
Slovenia 0-0 Scotland, 12 mins
Anotehr warning for Pocognoli's men as Matko is in plenty of space down the right and fizzes a low cross into the six-yard box that Hendry does brilliantly to lunge and clear away. Sturm was waiting to turn that in
Slovenia 0-0 Scotland, 10 mins
I'd say that McBurnie is more out on the left than directly up front alongside Ure and McGinn shaded out to the right, so perhaps it is more of a 3-4-3 than the 3-4-1-2 that it appeared.
NO GOAL! Slovenia 0-0 Scotland, 8 mins
Well that's a huge let-off for Scotland! Slovenia slice them apart as Sturm gets away in space down the right, cuts the ball back to Sporar and it's a beautiful first-time finish, in off the post.
But the flag's up! Sturm was indeed offside as he broke clear initially.