Hayden Panettiere, who became a household name as a teenager for her role in Heroes and later starred in Nashville and multiple Scream films, has died at age 36.
Police in Greenville, South Carolina, said officers "responded to a report of an unresponsive female" at around 1:50 pm ET on Sunday (August 16). She was pronounced dead at the scene. A cause of death has not been revealed, but an autopsy showed no signs of trauma.
Her father, Skip, confirmed Panettiere's death in a heartbreaking statement to ABC News. Panettiere's co-stars including Connie Britton, Tim Allen, Viola Davis and Melissa Barrera have offered heartfelt tributes to the two-time Golden Globe nominee on social media.
Among her most memorable roles were Sheryl Yoast in the 2000 Denzel Washington-led film Remember the Titans, high school cheerleader Claire Bennet on NBC's sci-fi drama Heroes (2006-2010), and aspiring country singer Juliette Barnes on the hit TV series Nashville (2012-2018).
Her New York Times bestselling memoir, This Is Me: A Reckoning, was published in May this year, in which she looked back at her childhood in Hollywood and her experiences with addiction, postpartum depression, abusive relationships, and the loss of custody of her daughter, Kaya, whom she shares with former heavyweight boxer Wladimir Klitschko.
Hayden Panettiere dead: Heroes and Nashville star dies aged 36
Hayden Panettiere, best known for her roles in Heroes, Nashville, and the Scream franchise, has died aged 36.
"It is with profound sadness that we share the tragic passing of our beloved Hayden," Panettiere's father, Skip said in a statement to ABC News. "She was an incredible light and a force of nature who brought immeasurable love and joy to all who knew her - and to the millions who watched her onscreen."
No cause of death was announced.
Music video director recalls 'sweet' Hayden Panettiere
Music video director Chris Applebaum has shared a behind-the-scenes look at his time working with Hayden Panettiere, posting footage from her 2008 video for "Wake Up Call".
Panettiere released "Wake Up Call" as her first single not tied to one of her acting projects, with the video directed by Applebaum and featuring Marvel star Sebastian Stan as her boyfriend.
Applebaum wrote that he had recently seen Panettiere at Paris Hilton's and the pair had been "cracking up" about memories from making the video, including "pranking Klitschko in Miami" and jokes about how "tiny" she was.
"Such a sweet, tiny little bundle of joy," he wrote. "Your memory will always be a blessing."
'Rest in peace, sweet princess': Kelly Osbourne bids farewell to Hayden Panettiere
Kelly Osbourne has spoken about the bond she shared with Hayden Panettiere, saying they understood one another through the particular pressures of growing up famous.
"I am deeply saddened by the loss of someone who meant so much to me," Osbourne wrote, sharing a photograph of Panettiere on her Instagram Stories. "We understood each other in a way few truly can - recognising how difficult it is to grow up in the spotlight, and how isolating it can feel even when surrounded by so many people."
"My heart grieves for someone so special to this world and such a good friend to me," she continued. "I will never forget you, Hayden, and I will always believe you deserved better."
"Rest in peace, sweet princess. You will never be forgotten," Osbourne added.
Matt Lanter recalls Hayden Panettiere's 'tons of laughs' across two shows
Matt Lanter shared a full-circle memory of Hayden Panettiere, having played her boyfriend on two different shows more than a decade ago.
"So sad to hear of Hayden's passing," Lanter wrote. "She played my girlfriend on Commander in Chief then I went over to her show and played her boyfriend on S1 of Heroes. We always had a great time on set and tons of laughs. Man, just too young."
Panettiere appeared as Stacy in a 2006 episode of Commander in Chief, in which she played Lanter's girlfriend. Lanter played Horace Calloway, the teenage son of President Mackenzie Allen.
Later that year, the pair reunited on Heroes, where Panettiere played cheerleader Claire Bennet and Lanter appeared as Brody Mitchum, a quarterback who dates Claire before becoming one of the show's villains.
Hayden Panettiere's final director says she 'taught me so much'
Brandon Auman, the writer and director of Sleepwalker, Hayden Panettiere's final film, has opened up about the time they spent working together following her death at 36.
The psychological thriller, released in January 2026, stars Panettiere as Sarah, an artist haunted by the death of her daughter in a car accident while her abusive husband lies in a coma.
Auman shared a tribute on Instagram, writing: "Horrible news. Completely devastated. You taught me so much on set, and the personal stories you shared with me about growing up in the industry were often profound, surreal and amazing. Thank you for everything. I'll miss you, Hayden."
Panettiere had spoken warmly about working with Auman, describing him as "so passionate" and saying she wanted to be "as present for him as I could".
Derek Hough says seeing old photo of Hayden Panettiere 'breaks my heart'
Derek Hough has shared a memory of working with Hayden Panettiere while she was pregnant with her daughter, Kaya.
The Dancing With the Stars judge appeared alongside Panettiere on Nashville in 2014, playing movie star Noah West opposite her character, country singer Juliette Barnes.
Sharing a photograph from their time together, Hough wrote: "Heartbroken to hear about Hayden's passing. The little time I got to spend with her, she was so sweet, so kind. I've always admired her work and the joy she brought people."
He continued: "She was actually pregnant when we filmed together. Looking at this photo now, having recently become a father myself, breaks my heart."
Heroes cast remember Hayden Panettiere as 'one of the brighter lights'
Hayden Panettiere's former Heroes co-stars have been sharing personal memories of the actor.
Sendhil Ramamurthy said he met Panettiere at the final screen test for Heroes, where he found her "belting show tunes in the waiting room" while he was "sweating" with nerves. He described her as "a pro" despite being nearly twice his age and having "3x as much experience".
"I learned a lot from her," he wrote. Ramamurthy remembered how she "stuck up for background actors when they were mistreated", knew "every crew members name" and was "so generous with her time".
He ended by describing her as "a kind, joyful, professional, shi*t-talker, who even at a young age, understood the importance of hydration".
David Anders, who played Adam Monroe on Heroes, wrote: "One of the brighter lights I've ever met and had the privilege to call a friend. I love you Hayden. Always and forever. Wherever you are now."
Dania Ramirez, who played Maya Herrera, wrote: "My heart aches so much right now. I love you and will always miss you. I take comfort in knowing that I am with you in life and in death because your love and energy has always transcended this dimension."
James Kyson, who played Ando Masahashi, remembered meeting Panettiere when she was 16 and said she was already "a veteran actor with such bright spirit, and an older soul". He also recalled her as "a fierce protector of animal rights" and a "'cheerleader' for kindness, justice, and people being treated fairly".
Skip Panettiere's statement in full
Alan "Skip" Panettiere issued the following statement to ABC News regarding the death of his daughter, Hayden Panettiere.
"It is with profound sadness that we share the tragic passing of our beloved Hayden," the statement said.
"She was an incredible light and a force of nature who brought immeasurable love and joy to all who knew her - and to the millions who watched her onscreen."
He then asked for privacy "as our family takes time to process this unimaginable loss."
Kim Cattrall mourns her Ice Princess daughter Hayden Panettiere
Kim Cattrall has remembered Hayden Panettiere, who played her on-screen daughter in the 2005 Disney film Ice Princess, with a brief but poignant tribute.
"Rest in peace sweet Hayden. Gone far too soon," Cattrall wrote on Instagram.
In the film, Cattrall played Tina Harwood, a former figure skater and coach whose daughter Gen, played by Panettiere, becomes rivals with Michelle Trachtenberg's aspiring skater Casey Carlyle.
The film has taken on a particularly tragic meaning for fans after Panettiere's death, coming just 18 months after Trachtenberg died aged 39.