Hayden Panettiere, who became a household name as a teenager for her role in Heroes and later starred in Nashville and multiple Scream films, has died at age 36.
Panettiere was pronounced dead at a South Carolina apartment Sunday, August 16. A cause of death has not been revealed, but an autopsy showed no signs of trauma. Toxicology reports are pending and could take up to 12 weeks, according to the Greenville County Coroner's Office.
A newly released incident report states that the 911 call was made by Brian Hickerson, 37, who is referred to as Panettiere's boyfriend. Panettiere's estranged mother, Lesley Vogel, described Brian as "a person in her life that we have been trying to get rid of for quite some time".
Brian Hickerson reportedly turned over a "bag of medication" belonging to Panettiere to the police, but the contents of that bag has so far been redacted. His brother Zach Hickerson was also present on the scene. The Independent has approached police for further information.
The actor's father, Skip, confirmed Panettiere's death in a heartbreaking statement to ABC News. Panettiere's ex-fiance, Wladimir Klitschko said he was "deeply saddened" by the news but vowed to make sure the couple's daughter, Kaya, "remembers the person" Panettiere was.
Dozens of Panettiere's co-stars including Heroes actor Masi Oka, Nashville co-star Connie Britton, Tim Allen, Viola Davis and Melissa Barrera have offered heartfelt tributes to the two-time Golden Globe nominee on social media.
Among her most memorable roles were Sheryl Yoast in the 2000 Denzel Washington-led film Remember the Titans, high school cheerleader Claire Bennet on NBC's sci-fi drama Heroes (2006-2010), and aspiring country singer Juliette Barnes on the hit TV series Nashville (2012-2018).
Her New York Times bestselling memoir, This Is Me: A Reckoning, was published in May this year, in which she looked back at her childhood in Hollywood and her experiences with addiction, postpartum depression, abusive relationships, and the loss of custody of her daughter, Kaya, whom she shares with former heavyweight boxer Wladimir Klitschko.
Hayden Panettiere dead: Heroes and Nashville star dies aged 36
Hayden Panettiere, best known for her roles in Heroes, Nashville, and the Scream franchise, has died aged 36.
"It is with profound sadness that we share the tragic passing of our beloved Hayden," Panettiere's father, Skip said in a statement to ABC News. "She was an incredible light and a force of nature who brought immeasurable love and joy to all who knew her - and to the millions who watched her onscreen."
No cause of death was announced.
Wladimir Klitschko breaks silence over ex-fiancée's death
In an Instagram post, Wladimir Klitschko wrote: "Our family is going through a time of profound shock and grief.
"The announcement of Hayden's tragic death saddens me deeply. She left this world far too soon. Hayden was, although no longer my partner, an important part of my life and the mother of our daughter, Kaya.
"She built an incredible career through immense talent, while also facing the darker sides of a very demanding industry. Nothing will erase the times we shared or the place she had in our lives.
"To our daughter Kaya, I will always speak of her mother with respect and make sure she remembers the person she was.
"I extend my deepest condolences to Hayden's parents, her friends, and her fans, who are also grieving today. Young and talented people like Hayden should not leave this world so soon.
"I ask everyone to please respect our family's feelings and privacy during this incredibly difficult time. For now, this is all I wish to say.
"Thank you to everyone who is supporting my family and expressing their sincere condolences.
"Rest easy, Hayden. May you find eternal peace. #WeLoveYouHayden"
Hayden Panettiere wrote about the pain of motherhood and postpartum depression
Panettiere was unusually candid about motherhood in her memoir This Is Me: A Reckoning, describing how difficult it was to bond with Kaya after the onset of postpartum depression.
"I wasn't OK," she wrote. "I had to figure out how to bond with her. It felt like an insurmountable task, and I was only on the first day."
She later said she had been diagnosed with postpartum depression when Kaya was four months old, while anxiety and addiction further complicated her early years as a mother.
In a May interview with Jay Shetty, Panettiere pushed back against the idea that she had abandoned Kaya when she gave Klitschko custody in 2018. She said the decision came while she was struggling with postpartum depression, anxiety and addiction and trying to get well.
"The idea that anybody would think that I would just give away my child and be OK with it is heartbreaking," she said. "Couldn't be farther from the truth."
Hayden Panettiere discusses her bond with daughter Kaya in final interview
Hayden Panettiere's on-and-off boyfriend was at apartment where she died, police report says
Hayden Panettiere's on-and-off boyfriend Brian Hickerson and his brother Zach Hickerson were at the South Carolina apartment where the actor died over the weekend, according to a police report released Tuesday.
A Greenville police officer who responded to the residence Sunday afternoon was met by the brothers and then observed paramedics performing CPR on an unresponsive woman, the report states.
"The patient did not seem to have any obvious physical reasons to be unresponsive," the officer notes. After attempting lifesaving measures, the emergency workers declared Panettiere dead at 2.31 pm.
Director Griff Furst criticised for remarks about Hayden Panettiere on set
Griff Furst, who directed Hayden Panettiere in the 2025 thriller A Breed Apart, has faced criticism after describing the actor as "not okay" when she arrived on set and saying "the energy in her room was pretty dark".
Furst said he had known Panettiere for about a decade and was excited to work with her, but was warned by the film's security team that "something was off" when they collected her from the airport.
He said Panettiere was "incredibly sweet and gracious and excited to work", but added: "She was not okay."
The comments drew criticism from fans, with one accusing Furst of "ambulance chasing".
Actor Alexandra Grey questioned whether the details were appropriate to share so soon after Panettiere's death, writing: "I think the only thing that we want [to] hear is that you are grateful that you had an opportunity to work with such a talented individual."
Furst later said he had spoken out because tabloids were seeking comments and he wanted to prevent his words being "taken out of context". "Let's keep the focus where it belongs: on the realities of addiction," he wrote.
Hayden Panettiere said Nashville became 'a distorted reflection' of her life
Hayden Panettiere wrote in her memoir This Is Me: A Reckoning that playing troubled country singer Juliette Barnes on Nashville became increasingly difficult as the character's story began to mirror her own struggles.
"I realised they were modeling the script after my life," she wrote, describing the experience as "looking in a funhouse mirror, seeing a distorted reflection" and "diving headfirst into my own hell".
Juliette's storylines included postpartum depression, addiction and a custody battle - experiences that closely reflected Panettiere's own life after the birth of her daughter, Kaya, in 2014.
In a May interview with Jay Shetty, she said: "I didn't know where Juliette began and Hayden ended. I didn't even realise I was becoming her constantly, and I wasn't able to take care of myself."
Neutrogena under fire again for dropping Hayden Panettiere after she revealed postpartum depression struggle
Neutrogena is facing a boycott and swarms of social media backlash over a story from Hayden Panettiere that has resurfaced after her sudden death at 36.
The Heroes star, who was the face of the popular skincare brand for about 10 years, said in her 2026 memoir This Is Me: A Reckoning that Neutrogena severed ties with her after she spoke publicly about receiving mental health treatment for postpartum depression following the birth of her daughter, Kaya, in 2014.
Panettiere alleged that her contract with the company was canceled because she revealed her PPD diagnosis on Live! with Kelly and Michael in 2015, explaining in her memoir: "Neutrogena canceled my long-standing contract, and it was yet another blow in a year that had given almost nothing else."
Read the full report here:
Panettiere's Remember the Titans co-star reveals he smoked heroin at film's premiere: 'I believed I wouldn't wake up'
Ethan Suplee has paid tribute to his Remember the Titans co-star Hayden Panettiere, sharing how her "energy and innocence" briefly healed him during a difficult period.
Sharing an old photo of him holding Panettiere at the film's red carpet premiere, Suplee recalled on Instagram how she "ran up to me, leaped into my arms, and gave me a big hug."
"Holding her I was lighter, some of her energy and innocence washed over me, and for a moment my smile was genuine," he added in the caption, revealing that soon after, he "went from the press line to the bathroom and smoked heroin."
Hayden Panettiere's estranged mother speaks about her daughter after her death
Hayden Panettiere's mother, Lesley Vogel, has spoken publicly for the first time since her daughter's death, saying the actor was "an amazingly talented person" but had struggled with growing up in the entertainment industry.
"I think Hayden was an amazingly talented person in so many departments," Vogel told NBC News. "I think young people who grow up in the entertainment industry - it is a struggle and it's a very challenging industry and it's not unusual for them to sadly find the wrong path."
"I think it becomes very difficult to be true to yourself, and I think Hayden sadly lost her way," she continued. "I wish it were different. I wish she had stayed true to herself because she had many incredible attributes."
Vogel added: "I just feel that she's with her brother and they're at peace." Panettiere's younger brother, Jansen, died in 2023 aged 28.
Panettiere's relationship with Vogel had become strained long before her death. In her memoir, This Is Me: A Reckoning, she wrote that the boundary between mother and manager had blurred as she grew up, leaving her feeling she had become "the confidant and the assistant and the therapist and the shoulder to cry on and everything but her child".