Police are strengthening security in Atlanta on Wednesday as they brace for trouble after England's World Cup semi-final against Argentina was designated the tournament's "highest-risk" clash.
Argentina fans were filmed burning the Union Jack in Escobar, on the outskirts of Buenos Aires, ahead of the grudge match, while England manager Thomas Tuchel said his side were ready to face an Argentina team "fuelled by history".
The FBI have deemed the game to be the most high-risk of the tournament due to the deep-seated historical animosity between the nations.
Local police met with the agency and Fifa on Monday to address the potential fan escalation.
For the first time at the tournament, there will be separate gates for the two sets of supporters, and the Atlanta Police Department (APD) are deploying extra officers and resources around the city.
Argentina's security minister, Alejandra Monteoliva, said ramped-up security had been discussed at a meeting in the US, telling a local radio station: "There will be 1,600 officers ... We want the celebration to be peaceful."
England last played Argentina in 2005, and previous clashes have resulted in controversial incidents. If England win, it will be the first time they have reached a World Cup final since 1966.
The rivalry between the countries was intensified during the 1982 military conflict over the Falkland Islands, which the Argentines call Islas Malvinas.
Argentina invaded and occupied the British territory for more than two months, before UK forces seized it back following a military campaign that left more than 900 people dead and thousands injured.
Sir Keir Starmer's spokesperson said football "should be about the game and about bringing people together" amid renewed political tension over the islands.
Ms Monteoliva said Argentina fans would not be able to take any flags claiming sovereignty over the islands into the stadium.
"The entry of elements that have any type of provocative message, whether of political or racial content, is prohibited. They will not be able to enter flags or posters with that content," she added.
In a statement, the Atlanta Police Department said it has enhanced its citywide public safety and security posture.
The force added: "Additional personnel and resources are already deployed and will continue to be strategically assigned ... to help ensure a safe and enjoyable experience for everyone.
"Adjustments are a routine part of managing an event of this magnitude and are intended to ensure a safe and enjoyable Fifa World Cup experience."
Ahead of the game, the Football Supporters' Association, which provides support and services to England fans, said: "The way England fans have conducted themselves across North America has done our country proud.
"We've continued to show that the outdated stereotypes don't define us... let's make sure we continue to look after one another, represent England with pride, and give everyone another reminder of why we have the best fans in the world."