The show must go on. That's the motto that Dolly Parton's namesake theme park is abiding by in the wake of the country music legend's death.
Parton's death was announced Tuesday by her nephew in a video shared to her official Instagram account. A cause of death has not been revealed.
Dollywood, located in Pigeon Forge, Tennessee, will remain open this week despite the singer's death at age 80. Parton took over as co-owner and rebranded the park as Dollywood in 1986.
Dollywood confirmed to The Independent that the park "will open as scheduled this week" and that plans for a memorial to Parton will be announced, "in the near future."
In a statement shared on Instagram, a spokesperson for Dollywood said, "With heavy hearts, the Dollywood family mourns the passing of our beloved Dreamer-in-Chief, Dolly Parton. Everyone at Dollywood shares the sorrow of countless people around the world touched by Dolly's warmth, wisdom and generous spirit.
"Dolly's heartfelt wish was that Dollywood always remain a place of joy, hope and togetherness-a space where families and friends could honor her memory, not with silence, but with laughter, music and shared dreams," the statement continued.
"Dolly's enduring legacy extends beyond her music and generosity to her remarkable work ethic-an inspiration to people everywhere. In her spirit, Dollywood will be open Wednesday as Dolly wanted, always reminding everyone with her signature sparkle -- 'the show must go on.' Together, we honor her by carrying forward her message of love, perseverance, and hope."
Eugene Naughton, Dollywood Parks & Resorts President, added: "The greatest privilege of my life has been helping Dolly bring her dreams to life at Dollywood. Dolly's heart was as vast as the mountains she cherished, and her compassion knew no bounds. She inspired generations to dream boldly and love deeply. While we grieve her loss, we are honored and committed to carry her light forward. Her legacy will continue to shine in every melody sung, every smile shared and every dream kindled within these gates."
The Independent has reached out to Dollywood for more information.
Parton was born in a two-room log cabin and rose to become the world's wealthiest country music star with timeless hits including "9 to 5" and "Jolene."
Her death was announced by her nephew, Bryan Seaver, who said: "This video announcement is something Dolly asked of me years ago."
"Dolly has lived in the light and is in the arms of Jesus," said Seaver, who served as Parton's head of security for more than two decades.
Within hours of Parton's death, hundreds of celebrities and politicians have paid tribute to the Queen of Country, including Donald Trump, who ordered flags to be lowered for a week following Parton's death.