Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
F1 returns to the Baku City Circuit for the Azerbaijan Grand Prix this weekend and round 15 of the 2026 season.
Kimi Antonelli continued his brilliant form at the Spanish Grand Prix last time out, winning the first event held on the new Madrid street track after benefiting from a well-timed safety car period early on. Antonelli now leads the world championship by 81 points over Mercedes teammate George Russell.
Max Verstappen finished second in Madrid with pole-sitter Lando Norris having to settle for third. Lewis Hamilton was forced to retire after a brake issue in his Ferrari car and the Briton now trails Antonelli by a mammoth 101 points with nine rounds remaining.
This year's race in Baku will take place on a Saturday because Sunday, 27 September marks Azerbaijan's Remembrance Day, with the whole schedule shifting forward by one day to avoid a clash with a national day of mourning.
Follow live updates from the Azerbaijan Grand Prix
Max Verstappen fastest in FP3
Despite ending his final push lap by going into the turn 15 run-off area, Verstappen keeps top spot in the final stages.
George Russell just misses out on three practice session P1s, with Lewis Hamilton sneaking in in third - a tenth off Verstappen.
4-10: Antonelli, Leclerc, Gasly, Piastri, Norris, Hadjar, Colapinto
Max Verstappen goes quickest
Bit of a statement from the Red Bull driver!
He goes fastest by 0.099 secs to Russell - and three-tenths clear of Antonelli.
Verstappen up to P2
The Dutchman now just a tenth off Russell, fastest with a 1:44:021 as the soft-tyre runs come in now.
3-10: Antonelli, Leclerc, Norris, Piastri, Hamilton, Hadjar, Bortoleto, Ocon
Final five minutes of practice!
George Russell quickest
It's been mainly race runs so far, with Russell quickest by 0.162 secs over Leclerc.
Antonelli in third, with top-five filled by Hamilton and Verstappen.
Expect the qualifying simulation laps to come in now though...
Max Verstappen goes off
The Red Bull driver leaves the track at turn 15: "If for once this f***ing car wouldn't jump like a kangaroo, my god!"
Lewis Hamilton also locked up at turn 1, while replays show that Stroll touched the wall at turn 1 and that ruined the steering in his Aston Martin car.
Lance Stroll stops
On the outside of turn 4, Stroll has stopped his Aston Martin car.
And he's getting out of the car. That may well be his session done...
Pierre Gasly quickest early on
Only half of the grid out on track in the first 15 minutes, with Alpine's Gasly on top - six-tenths clear of Liam Lawson and nine-tenths ahead of Alex Albon.
More times to come in now though...
Top-10 - driver standings
Antonelli has a 81-point lead in the world championship heading into Baku.
1. Kimi Antonelli (Mercedes) - 292 points
2. George Russell (Mercedes) - 211 points
3. Lewis Hamilton (Ferrari) - 191 points
4. Lando Norris (McLaren) - 186 points
5. Charles Leclerc (Ferrari) - 167 points
6. Max Verstappen (Red Bull) - 145 points
7. Oscar Piastri (McLaren) - 120 points
8. Isack Hadjar (Racing Bulls) - 71 points
9. Liam Lawson (Racing Bulls) - 59 points
10. Pierre Gasly (Alpine) - 41 points
Start times this weekend:
Friday 25 September
- Qualifying: 1pm
Saturday 26 September
- Race: 12pm