Firefighters are battling a significant heathland blaze in the New Forest, warning they expect to remain on scene for the "foreseeable future".
The inferno, which ignited near the A31 in Hampshire, originated from a vehicle fire that rapidly spread to the adjacent heathland.
Hampshire Fire and Rescue Service confirmed they received over 160 emergency calls reporting a car on fire on the eastbound A31 at approximately 5.24pm on Sunday.
A substantial response has been mounted, with 26 fire engines, four water carriers, six off-road vehicles, and multiple command units deployed to the site near Ringwood.
The service detailed how the flames initially engulfed the vehicle, then extended to the central reservation before progressing into the nearby heathland.
On Monday, it said: "Firefighters continue to tackle the fire affecting heathland near the A31 and will remain on site for the foreseeable future.
"We continue to have a significant presence in the area as crews work to bring the fire under control."
The fire service has warned people living nearby that it may need to lay hoses across their property as it draws water from a nearby lake.
"Fires in the countryside can be particularly challenging for firefighters, especially when it comes to getting sufficient water to the incident," it said.
It added: "At present, there is no need for any properties to be evacuated. Should this situation change, affected households will be contacted directly."
As of Monday morning, the A31 westbound carriageway is closed between the M27 J2 (Ower) and the A338 (Ringwood) while the eastbound carriageway is closed between the A338 and M27 J1 (Cadnam).
Motorists have been urged to avoid the area and use alternative routes whenever possible.
Hampshire and Isle of Wight Roads Policing shared on social media that any motorists who left their vehicles on the A31 are advised to call 101 as soon as they can.
Meanwhile, Nottinghamshire Fire and Rescue Service declared a major incident on Sunday as two large fires in woodland put a strain on resources.
Several wildfires have broken out in the UK over recent weeks, including large blazes at Dunwich Heath in Suffolk, Headon Warren on the Isle of Wight, Llanwonno in the Rhondda Valleys, South Wales, and the Cairngorms National Park in Scotland.
Hot weather continued to build on Sunday, with the south and south-eastern parts of England expected to have the highest temperatures.
According to the Fire Severity Index, any wildfires are likely to be exceptionally severe on Sunday in almost all of the east and south-east of England.
"Exceptional" severity is the highest ranking.