Celtic will be out for revenge as they host Rangers in the first Old Firm clash of the Scottish Premiership season.
The Gers powered to an impressive 3-0 victory over their rivals in the League Cup quarter-finals at Ibrox last weekend, a result that could give Derek McInnes lift off after a difficult start to life in Glasgow.
But with away fans banned from matches between the Old Firm teams in the Premiership and League Cup this season, it is Celtic and Martin O'Neill's side who will have home advantage at Parkhead this afternoon.
A deflating defeat to Ferencvaros in the Europa League in midweek means Celtic have lost back-to-back matches under O'Neill, but they have won six games from six to start their Premiership title defence. Can Rangers eat into their early five-point advantage or can Celtic stretch their lead at the top?
Follow live updates from Celtic v Rangers in the Old Firm, below
Celtic 0-0 Rangers, 2 mins
A couple of crunching 50-50s early on. You wouldn't expect anything less in the Old Firm.
And Rangers nearly score straight away! Raskin with a gorgeous ball in behind, Gassama with a yard of space but Donovan gets back brilliantly to put in the challenge and block it out for a goal-kick
KICK-OFF! Celtic v Rangers
Underway at a Celtic Park shorn of Rangers supporters. Can Celtic start better than they did a week ago?
Celtic v Rangers
Here's a reminder of the teams today.
In the game of Celtic goalkeeper flip-flop, Viljami Sinisalo gets the nod over Sam Johnstone this week, while Luke McCowan starts in attack. Haissem Hassan is still only on the bench for the Hoops. They go for three at the back after being surprised by Rangers doing that last weekend
Meanwhile, Rangers are unchanged from a week ago and that demolition of Celtic. Will James Penrice be in midfield again? Surely he will and Gers will persist with the three at the back that stunned their bitter rivals
Celtic XI: Sinisalo; Donovan, Carter-Vickers, Trusty, Scales, Tierney; McGregor, Baur; McCowan, Duran, Nygren.
Rangers XI: Pandur; Sterling, Fernandez, Makhanya, Penrice; Raskin, Neil; Gassama, Kim, Kelsy; Naderi
Ivor Pandur eyeing Old Firm repeat
Rangers goalkeeper Ivor Pandur got his first taste of Old Firm action last weekend, having signed from Hull City in the summer, and he is eager to repeat the 3-0 triumph.
"We are confident. I think we did a really good job last Sunday and we just want to repeat that," said Pandur.
"Obviously we had a week to prepare to see what we can improve on, do better. But the performance was good and we want to do the same.
"The experience was really good. Obviously, people can tell you but when you step on the pitch and you hear the sound and feel the energy, it's something different to what I have experienced in my life.
"So, I am truly grateful that I was able to experience that."
Crowd can give us the edge, says Cameron Carter-Vickers
Celtic Park will be entirely green and white today, with away fans banned for Old Firm games this season.
And Celtic defender Cameron Carter-Vickers believes that could makea. big difference this afternoon.
"We want to come out on Sunday, with the crowd behind us and everyone together and try to put a performance together that will get the result we want," said Carter-Vickers.
"Hopefully, it'll make a difference (the fans). As a Celtic player, that's what you want - 60,000 Celtic fans behind you and pushing the team on.
"If we can get that on Sunday, I think it'll create a good atmosphere for us to perform."
Scotland and Celtic great Danny McGrain diagnosed with Alzheimer's
Some sad news emerged earlier this week, with former Celtic and Scotland captain Danny McGrain announcing that he has been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease.
His family chose to disclose the diagnosis publicly "so that Danny can continue to receive the love and support of the Celtic Family, just as he has given so freely and humbly to others throughout his life".
In a statement released by the club, his wife Laraine said: "Danny received this diagnosis some time ago, and as time has moved on, we felt it was right to be open and clear.
"Danny has always loved helping supporters - whether through hospital visits, assisting fans with charity events, or sending messages of support.
"As time has gone on, that has become more difficult for Danny, so we wanted to explain his situation with honesty, and with the care and respect the Celtic Family has always shown us."
Arrivals at Celtic Park
Here's both teams entering the building a little earlier ahead of this Old Firm clash
Rangers team news - unchanged from last week
If it ain't broke, don't fix it. After their 3-0 demolition of Celtic last week, Derek McInnes has opted for an unchanged starting XI.
All eyes will be on James Penrice again to see if he's at left-back again in a four-at-the-back or if he pushes up into midfield, leaving a back three.
Djeidi Gassama and Kevin Kelsy both impressed on the wings last week, and will try to do so again.
Rangers XI: Pandur; Sterling, Fernandez, Makhanya, Penrice; Raskin, Neil; Gassama, Kim, Kelsy; Naderi
Celtic team news
Here's the team news for today, starting with Celtic.
Not unsurprisingly, Martin O'Neill has opted for Viljami Sinisalo in goal after Sam Johnstone's very shaky display in the Old Firm last weeked.
Once again, Haissem Hassan is only on the bench but Luke McCowan gets the start rather than Sebastian Tounekti. I fear that still won't be the most popular with Celtic fans though...
Camilo Duran looks to be leading the line with record signing Kasper Hogh on the bench and 3/5 at the back appears to be the order of the day again
Celtic XI: Sinisalo; Donovan, Carter-Vickers, Trusty, Scales, Tierney; McGregor, Baur; McCowan, Duran, Nygren