Lando Norris came from nowhere to edge out championship leader Kimi Antonelli and take a brilliant pole position for the Spanish Grand Prix.
World champion Norris had not troubled the top of the timesheets at any stage across the weekend in Madrid, but he pulled out a magical lap - one the British driver proclaimed as one of the best of his career - to see off Antonelli by just 0.011 seconds.
Max Verstappen will start from third place for the inaugural event at the Madring, a spot ahead of Ferrari's Lewis Hamilton, who at one stage looked set to land his first pole in Ferrari colours. George Russell, the nearest title challenger to Antonelli, will start a disappointing sixth.
Norris raised hope of defending his world crown with successive wins in Hungary and then the Netherlands, but a fourth place last time out in Monza leaves him 96 points adrift of Antonelli in the standings.
Follow live updates from the Spanish Grand Prix with The Independent
What time is the race?
The Spanish Grand Prix in Madrid starts at 2pm BST.
Ferrari boss Fred Vasseur:
When you are P1 after the first run in Q3, for sure you are targeting pole. I think Lewis made a small mistake at the start of his last flying lap and left around a tenth and a half in the first sector.
"Charles did a good lap and improved massively through Turns 5 and 6, but with such small gaps between the cars, it was not enough to do better than fifth.Now let's focus on tomorrow: the data from long runs on Friday might not be fully representative, as no one really focused on this and the track is still evolving very quickly.
"From today's F2 and F3 races, it's clear that overtaking is extremely difficult on this track but we also know the race could be chaotic, so we need to be ready to take every opportunity, whether that comes from a VSC, a Safety Car or even a red flag."
Carlos Sainz after his Q1 elimination at his home race
"It was a good lap but a scrappy qualifying overall, with several issues that cost us precious tenths in the end. We knew we would struggle at this track but we also went out very early for the last push, losing out on track evolution, and had some deployment losses that prevented us from getting into Q2. Apologies to Valtteri for impeding his lap, I wasn't aware he was pushing and had no time to get out of his way.
"On a positive note, this track has been a lot of fun to drive at qualifying pace, and I'm enjoying being so close to the walls and always driving at the limit. It's been incredible to feel the support of the fans throughout the weekend so far, and it's a dream come true to be here racing in front of my home crowd. Tomorrow, overtaking will be difficult, but we will try our best to come back and give everyone something to cheer for!"
Oscar Piastri, who qualified P7:
"P7. I'm a bit disappointed with that one. Overall, it was a bit of a messy session and the car felt nicer in FP3 than it did in Qualifying. We improved it a bit through the three Qualifying sessions, but I didn't have that last bit we needed in the last run.
"The first lap of Q3 on used tyres was okay, but my final run on new tyres wasn't good enough. Around this track, once you're out of rhythm it's very hard to get it back, and needing two sets in Q1 put on the back foot a bit."
George Russell after qualifying P6:
"It was a tough qualifying session for me today. The main factor we were managing throughout all the sessions was ensuring we had the tyres in the right window. I had a really good lap in Q1 and hoped that I had the same potential in my last lap of Q3.
"Unfortunately, it was a bit of a scrappy lap; I had a lot of understeer from turn 11 onwards and lost a couple of tenths from there. The tyres really struggle here with the heat and the long corners, so you can find yourself sliding around, losing more time, and being pushed further down the order.
"Understanding the tyres more ahead of tomorrow will be crucial as while it didn't all come together for me today, I hope tomorrow I'll be able to make my way through the pack. We saw high tyre degradation on Friday and if that repeats itself tomorrow, then there will definitely be opportunities for us to make good progress."
Constructor standings ahead of Spanish GP
1. Mercedes - 468 points
2. Ferrari - 346 points
3. McLaren - 287 points
4. Red Bull - 204 points
5. Racing Bulls - 75 points
6. Alpine - 62 points
7. Haas - 21 points
8. Audi - 16 points
9. Williams - 11 points
10. Aston Martin - 3 points
11. Cadillac - 0 points
COMMENT: How Kimi Antonelli manifested his inner Max Verstappen to reveal a new F1 reality
In the immediate aftermath, there was no sign of a crestfallen George Russell. As Kimi Antonelli jumped for joy with his family and made his way to the 'No 1' platform in the Monza pit-lane, it was in fact third-placed Max Verstappen who smiled and embraced the 20-year-old. And the Red Bull driver could not help but raise a smile. Moments earlier, Verstappen had embraced Antonelli's father Marco, a former national racer himself. In the Italian, perhaps the Dutchman saw an embodiment of himself, nine years his junior.
At the Italian Grand Prix on Sunday, in what was undoubtedly the race of the year so far, Antonelli produced a masterclass in all-out speed, poise and panache. Starting 19th on the grid, the Mercedes driver made 26 overtakes in total to execute a triumph which was rated at 25/1 pre-race. Not the impossibility it perhaps seemed but, nonetheless, a startling feat as he became Italy's first home grand prix winner since Ludovico Scarfiotti in 1966.
Full piece below:
Lewis Hamilton reacts after missing out on first Ferrari F1 pole: 'It's a dodgy set of tyres'
Speaking on team radio to his race engineer Carlo Santi afterwards, Hamilton said: "It's a dodgy set of tyres. Sorry guys, I gave it everything."
Elaborating further on his final few laps in qualifying, Hamilton told Sky Sports: "Second lap was just as good as the other one, it was the same time pretty much. I think I was a little bit, half a tenth quicker or something like that.
"But, for some reason, we went into that last lap and as I started, came round the last corner, I had understeer and I was like 'maybe these front tyres are not switched on,' [but] just turned out I just had more rear and more understeer through the lap."
Comical post-qualifying radio exchange between Lando Norris and his engineer:
Lando Norris: "Sorry. I f***** up man."
Will Joseph: "Hang on! Just wait a second... Two cars to go, wait a second. One car to go. Stay calm mate."
Norris: "F***ing idiot."
Joseph: "It wasn't your best final corner, but it's still pole, so well done."
Norris: "F*** YES! Ohhh what a lap! F***ing hell."
Joseph: "That was some lap."
Norris: "Gorgeous. Well done guys. Are you serious?"
Joseph: "Yeah I am serious!"
What is the starting grid?
1. Lando Norris (McLaren)
2. Kimi Antonelli (Mercedes)
3. Max Verstappen (Red Bull)
4. Lewis Hamilton (Ferrari)
5. Charles Leclerc (Ferrari)
6. George Russell (Mercedes)
7. Oscar Piastri (McLaren)
8. Liam Lawson (Red Bull)
9. Franco Colapinto (Alpine)
10. Arvid Lindblad (Racing Bulls)
11. Nico Hulkenberg (Audi)
12. Gabriel Bortoleto (Audi)
13. Esteban Ocon (Haas)
14. Pierre Gasly (Alpine)
15. Yuki Tsunoda (Racing Bulls)
16. Alex Albon (Williams)
17. Carlos Sainz (Williams)
18. Fernando Alonso (Aston Martin)
19. Sergio Perez (Cadillac)
20. Valtteri Bottas (Cadillac)
21. Ollie Bearman (Haas)
22. Lance Stroll (Aston Martin)