Today's top Sephora discount codes and offers
Restocking your beauty essentials can quickly add up. From tanning and skincare to hair treatments and make-up, Sephora has all your go-to brands and viral products to help you feel your most confident.
At Sephora, you can shop iconic brands such as Chanel, Elemis and Kerastase, Sephora's own collectionand Korean beauty from Beauty of Joseon, Skin 1004 and more. The best part? We've got all the latest promo codes, beauty deals and extra saving tips, so you can enjoy all your favourites for less.
More ways to save at Sephora in 2026
Save 20 per cent on first orders
If you're a new Sephora customer, there are plenty of ways for you to bag a discount on your first order. Here are the easiest ways to save:
- 15 per cent off your first order discount code: This is valid on full-priced items only and excludes electricals and selected brands.
- 20 per cent Sephora app discount: This offer is only valid using the app, and can only be used once and only on full-priced items.
- 15 per cent off your first order when you get referred: If you've been referred by a friend, make sure you follow the link sent to you, to take advantage of your discount.
MySephora member perks
Sephora's free loyalty programme, MySephora, rewards you every time you shop, leave reviews or book in-store services. You will earn points on purchases and on-site engagement, totalling to one point per £1 spent, two points for leaving a product review and five points for attending an in-store service. Plus, there's a 10 per cent discount on your two favourite brands and a birthday gift for all members.
Points can be redeemed at 100-point intervals in exchange for £5 gift vouchers, iconic beauty treats and £5 charity donations to Face Equality International.
You will also work your way up the membership tiers, each unlocking extra benefits:
- Bronze (0-199 points) - 10 per cent off your two favourite brands, member events and a birthday gift.
- Silver (200-799 points) - all of the bronze benefits, plus free standard delivery.
- Gold (800+ points) - all of the silver benefits, plus free premier next-day delivery and early access to sales and events.
Save 20 per cent with the Sephora student discount
Students can take advantage of exclusive Sephora discounts via Student Beans and Unidays, with up to 20 per cent off most full-priced items. Student Beans members can also earn points with MySephora for extra rewards.
Free delivery on selected orders
All orders over £20 qualify for Sephora free delivery; however, MySephora gold members are entitled to free next-day delivery, which is usually £4.95. If you're a repeat customer, it might be worth upgrading to premier delivery for £9.95. This gives you one year of unlimited next-day delivery with no minimum spend, so if you're a regular Sephora shopper, you'll soon make your money back.
Refer a friend and get 15 per cent off
Share the love with your friends and family and you'll both benefit from a 15 per cent discount on your next order. Simply register on the 'Mention me' page to send your referrals.
Save up to 60 per cent on bestsellers with daily deals
The Sephora offers section is packed with daily deals and free gifts, with savings of up to 60 per cent on top beauty and skincare brands. We've recently seen the trending Elemis pro-collagen black cherry cleansing balm discounted by 20 per cent. It's a favourite in the brand's pro-collagen range, so much so that we awarded it five stars in our recent review.
You can also find some of our Dyson favourites, such as the airstrait and airwrap, with up to 25 per cent off.
These deals are updated regularly, so if you spot one of your staples or a product that's been on your wishlist, it's best to grab it while you can.
Helpful FAQs
How do I redeem a Sephora discount code?
Click on the "see code" button to reveal and copy your code. You can now head back to your Sephora app, web browser app or follow our redirection link. Once your products are in your basket, continue through the payment process until you reach the payment page, where you can paste and apply your discount code.
Does Sephora offer an NHS discount?
Yes, NHS and healthcare workers can enjoy an exclusive 15 per cent discount or 6 per cent cashback through Health Service Discounts. Just log in (or register for free) to your account to access your unique code.
Why you can trust us
As The Independent's resident beauty writer, Lucy Smith has reviewed and tested hundreds of haircare, skincare and make-up products, so it's safe to say she knows a great deal when she sees one. From cult classics to emerging brands, such as Biodance and Hairification, Lucy know what's worth your money and what isn't.
Collaborating with our in-house team of deal experts, we regularly search for and quality check the best Sephora discount codes and offers to ensure that you're always getting a genuine deal. We don't just look for the biggest percentage off, we look for deals that genuinely make sense.
Transparency and trust are at the heart of everything we do. We only recommend products we truly believe in and brands we'd happily shop from ourselves. So when you see a saving featured on The Independent, you can be confident that it has been carefully selected to help you get the best value for your beauty buys.