Today's best Shark discount codes and offers
Shark is now part of SharkNinja. All Shark products are sold through the SharkNinja website, but this page focuses specifically on Shark appliances and related offers.
Shark is known for its powerful, innovative home appliances, from upright and cordless vacuums to robot cleaners and air purifiers. More recently, it has branched into beauty tech with popular hair styling tools such as the flexstyle multi-styler and cryoglow LED face mask. Our expert team has tracked down the latest Shark deals, promo codes and offers to help you get more for your money.
How we find the best Shark promo codes
Our resident consumer writer, Fran Watts, and the wider deals team are always on the lookout for the best discount codes, deals and offers. As well as working closely with Shark to secure the latest offers and voucher codes as soon as they are released, we hand-test every offer shared to ensure every code is valid and up-to-date.
Fran has worked for many years in the e-commerce space, understanding brand perks and what deals are truly worth your time and money. In her deals guides, she provides all the information you need to secure the best prices and maximise your budget.
Other retailers with Shark offers
If you're not set on buying directly from Shark, it's well worth checking prices at other major retailers. Stores such as Currys, Boots and Very often run their own promotions, bundle deals or seasonal discounts on popular Shark vacuums and haircare tools. Below, we've rounded up some of the best current offers from trusted retailers to help you get the strongest deal wherever you choose to shop.
More ways to save at Shark in 2026
First-order discount
If you're not already registered to receive Shark emails, you're missing out. Subscribing to these emails will ensure you're one of the first to hear about the brand's exciting launches, and believe us, you'll want to keep your eyes on what Shark has in store. A perk even better than being in the know, you'll get a 10 per cent discount on your first purchase when you sign up.
Shark weekly offers
Shark keeps things fresh with its rotating weekly deals, which can be a great option if you want to pick up a vacuum, steam mop or hair tool between major sales.
Discounts can be as high as 50 per cent, but deals do come and go quickly, so it's worth checking back often and snapping up a great deal when you see one. If you're willing to wait, these deals can save you an impressive amount on some of Shark's most popular appliances.
Bundle deals
If you're shopping for more than one appliance, bundle deals are where Shark really shines. Most bundles combine vacuums or steam mops, but we've also seen sets that include the sought-after cryoglow blemish repair mask as well.
You'll typically save up to 40 per cent when you bundle a deal, so it's worth considering before you buy.
NHS and blue light card discount
Shark also rewards frontline workers with nine per cent off across its entire range. Eligible groups include:
- Healthcare and NHS discount
- Military discount
- Teacher discount
- Police and fire service discount
- Delivery and transport staff discount
- Charity worker discount
- Supermarket staff discount
- Care and social worker discount
- Government discount
Shark student discount
Students and young professionals can also enjoy nine per cent off everything at Shark. You'll need to verify your education status through Unidays first, and then you can use your unique discount code at checkout.
Senior discount
Shark offers a discount for shoppers aged 55 and over, too. Verification takes place via Gocertify and only takes a few minutes. Once you're approved, you'll be given an exclusive code that you can use at checkout.
Price match guarantee
Shark's price match guarantee ensures that you never overpay on your purchase.
If you spot the same model at a lower price from an approved retailer, Shark will match it. That's provided the item is identical, in stock and sold under the same conditions. This ensures you're always getting the best possible price directly from the brand.
Free next-day delivery
Shark offers free next-day delivery on all orders of more than £30, which covers the majority of the items sold online. It makes delivery convenient by offering a one-hour delivery time slot and will send updates via text or email. Orders of less than £30 incur a £3.50 delivery fee.
Five-year guarantee
Shark provides extra reassurance with its extended guarantee. Simply register your appliance within 28 days of purchase to unlock a five-year parts and labour warranty for full-size vacuums, which includes repairs and replacements if anything goes wrong.
Cordless models have a shorter two-year guarantee, but offer the same protection. Standard exclusions apply, such as normal wear and tear, accidental damage or use of non-branded parts.
About Shark
Shark Clean is part of SharkNinja, a global product design and technology company based in Massachusetts. While Shark is best known for its powerful vacuum cleaners, the wider group also includes Ninja Kitchen appliances and together they've become a household name for practical, well-designed products.
In recent years, the brand has expanded into steam mops, hair tools and heated clothing care, all created with the same focus on convenience, innovation and thoughtful design.
Why you can trust us
To help you shop better, we've made it our mission to bring you deals that will enable you to spend your money wisely. Our team have years of experience when it comes to sourcing the very best deals, and know an epic saving from a dud discount. We also only bring you deals on brands that we trust.
Fancy a few more bargains? Check out our dedicated deals section