The US has launched fresh airstrikes on Iran after two American service members were killed in an Iranian drone and missile attack on a base in Jordan.
US Central Command said the operation late on Saturday was intended to "swiftly punish" the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.
Donald Trump described the deaths of the service members as "a very sad thing", saying the troops had died "in service of our country". He added that Washington remained committed to "never allowing Iran to have a nuclear weapon".
Iran earlier said it was suspending its commitments under an initial peace agreement with the US, accusing Washington of violating the deal through its continued military campaign.
In a statement attributed to Mojtaba Khamenei and broadcast on state television, Iran's supreme leader declared Trump's signature on the accord "worthless and invalid" and warned the US of "unforgettable lessons" if it continued attacking the Islamic Republic.
Lebanon's Aoun to meet Trump at White House
Lebanese President Joseph Aoun will make his first trip to the White House this week to present a plan to US President Donald Trump on how to disarm Iran-backed militant group Hezbollah and secure Israel's withdrawal from Lebanon.
President Aoun, who served as the commander of Lebanon's US-backed army before being elected president last year, is the first Lebanese head of state in nearly 20 years to visit the White House, where he will meet Trump face-to-face for the first time.
Tuesday's meeting comes at a crucial moment for Lebanon: Israeli troops are occupying a swathe of the country's south, hundreds of thousands of Lebanese remain displaced following Israeli strikes and Hezbollah has firmly rejected the government's direct talks with Israel -- and efforts by the state to strip it of its arms. In comments published by his office last week, Aoun said he would ask Trump to "exert the necessary pressure on Israel" to implement a U.S.-brokered June 26 agreement between Lebanon and Israel. That deal aims to disarm Hezbollah, see a progressive Israeli troop withdrawal and set the stage for peaceful ties between the two countries.
A Lebanese official said Aoun would present Trump with a written proposal on how to decommission Hezbollah's massive arsenal. The official said Aoun believes only Trump possesses the leverage needed to pressure Israel to withdraw its troops and help Lebanon restore its sovereignty.
Three tiny islands help control access to the Strait of Hormuz. They're once again in the crosshairs of the Iran war
Three strategically vital islands at the mouth of the Persian Gulf have once again become a focal point in the escalating US military campaign against Iran.
Abu Musa, along with Greater and Lesser Tunb, were seized by Iran in 1971 from what would later become the United Arab Emirates. These rocky outposts now serve as a critical Iranian garrison, enabling Tehran to exert considerable influence over the Strait of Hormuz, a vital waterway through which a fifth of the world's oil and natural gas transits during peacetime.
Recent US strikes targeting two of these islands have reignited debate and speculation surrounding their future and their long-disputed ownership.
Kuwait residents stock up on essentials after Iranian strikes
People in Kuwait said they were stocking up on water and canned food after Iranian strikes hit an oil facility and a power and water plant.
"The demand for water and canned goods has increased since this morning amid fears that services or supply chains will be affected," Hassan Rayan, 61, told AFP.
Another resident, Ali Mahmoud, 46, said "the streets and beaches were almost empty, even though it is a holiday".
Kuwait said Iranian strikes on Saturday damaged an oil facility and a power and water plant, forcing several electricity generation units offline. It was the second attack on a Kuwaiti power and water plant in as many days.
US oil firms sign deals with Iraq to develop alternative shipping routes
US companies signed roughly $60bn in agreements and partnerships with the Iraqi government Friday, including deals intended to create alternative routes for shipping oil out of the Persian Gulf.
The deals, signed at the US Chamber of Commerce, also involved other industries, including healthcare, communications and infrastructure.
It's not clear when the oil deals will be able to create viable alternatives to the Strait of Hormuz, through which about a fifth of the world's oil flows. Goldman Sachs estimates that pipelines in just one country take at least two and a half years to build, and these pipelines would travel through two or more nations.
Kuwait says air defences intercepting Iranian missiles and drones
Kuwait's military said its air defences were intercepting Iranian missiles and drones after what it described as "sinful Iranian aggression".
In a statement, the General Staff of the Army said explosions heard across the country were the result of air defence systems intercepting the incoming attacks.
"Kuwaiti air defences are currently confronting hostile missile and drone attacks," it said.
The military urged the public to follow safety instructions issued by the authorities as the interceptions continued.
What we know about the US troops killed in Jordan
The US has confirmed that two service members were killed and another is missing after an Iranian missile and drone attack on a military base in Jordan, the first American military deaths since the early stages of the conflict with Iran in March.
- US Central Command (Centcom) said the attack took place on Friday. Four other service members were medically evacuated to hospitals in Jordan before being discharged, while several others suffered minor injuries and returned to duty.
- Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps claimed responsibility for the strike on Al Azraq air base, saying it had targeted US military assets with missiles and drones. Iranian state media also claimed several US aircraft were destroyed, although those reports have not been independently verified.
- Centcom said it would withhold the identities of the two troops until at least 24 hours after their families had been notified. Their deaths bring the number of US service members killed since the conflict began to 16, with more than 420 wounded.
- Reacting to the news, Donald Trump said: "We hate to see it happen. It's in service to our country," while defence secretary Pete Hegseth wrote on X: "Godspeed, heroes. Their sacrifice only stiffens our resolve."
Iran insists it will retain control of Strait of Hormuz
Iran has insisted it will continue to control the Strait of Hormuz, as tensions over the strategic waterway deepen.
Brig Gen Mohammad Akrami-Nia, a spokesman for the Iranian army, said the Islamic Republic would continue "maintaining control over the Strait of Hormuz despite ongoing American aggression".
"The Islamic Republic of Iran is capable of exercising control over the Strait of Hormuz from any point of its territory," he said, according to Iran's state broadcaster Press TV.
On Friday, the European Union and the Gulf Cooperation Council reaffirmed that all ships have the right to pass through the strait under international law, saying navigation cannot be "suspended, impeded, or made conditional" by any state.
The joint statement also urged Iran to end attacks on commercial shipping and rejected any permits, transit fees or other conditions on vessels using the route.
Starving and stranded in a war zone: The sailors living in fear of death in the Strait of Hormuz
"Our ship has safely crossed," Herambh Karmarkar wrote in a message to his family as his vessel left the Strait of Hormuz.
It was the last text that the 30-year-old marine engineer would ever send. Hours later, he was killed in an Iranian strike on his ship, the Cyprus-flagged GFS Galaxy,as it passed by the coast of Oman on Sunday.
For days he had been reported missing, but on Wednesday his family in India received the news they had been dreading.
Maira Butt reports:
IRGC commander says strikes will continue until Hormuz is secure
A senior commander in Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps has vowed to continue attacks until security is restored along the country's southern coast and the Strait of Hormuz.
Commander of the IRGC Aerospace Force Brig Gen Majid Mousavi said, according to a report by Iran's Tasnim news agency: "Our effective and precisely targeted strikes from across Iran against the enemy will continue until calm returns to the southern coastline and the Strait of Hormuz."