Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
Hannah Fry almost became the second Traitor to be banished on Friday (9 October) night - but the maths whizz survived another day thanks to an unsual defence.
The episode began with Bella Ramsey becoming the second Celebrity Traitors star to be murdered, and just as our trio in the turret predicted, their exit sent the Faithfuls into a spin.
Before they reconvened at the roundtable, there was a challenge to deal with and host Claudia Winkleman took the players to the show's infamous cabin (yes, the one where Celia Imrie passed wind). This time, it was Miranda Hart who found herself unable to control her bodily functions - vomiting at the horrendous smell in the wooden hut.
At the roundtable, Hannah made a passionate plea not just for herself but for Julie Hesmondhalgh, who had also raised suspicisions. It was a play that miraculously worked with the Coronation Street str being banished.
We left the series with yet another cliffhanger ending, as the Traitors picked Rob Beckett, Romesh Ranganathan, Leigh-Anne Pinnock and Ross Kemp for a late-night game of hide'n'seek. They will hide in crypts, where one will be murdered face-to-face. What the Traitors don't know, is that Little Mix singer Leigh-Anne has a key that will save her from an attempted murder.
Follow along with all the latest Celebrity Traitors updates in our live blog below...
Forget Maya Jama - this is the best player on Celebrity Traitors right now
Is self-proclaimed "Marple" Miranda Hart secretly the best player on the show right now?
She's certainly leading the charge against Hannah Fry. On Thursday's episode, Hart pointed out that Fry had been economical with the truth about her tussle with Myha'la for a shield during the last challenge.
She then put the pressure back on the mathematician during Friday's round table - although ultimately it was Faithful Julie Hesmondhalgh that was sent home.
For my colleague Lauren Morris, it's these astute detective skills that make Hart perhaps the best Faithful in the game - or even the best player full stop.
You can read her take below. Such fun!
Viewers spot Hannah Fry's big round table mistake that could seal her fate
Professor Hannah Fry came under serious heat from her fellow Celebrity Traitors players during last night (9 October)'s round table - so could a slip-up in her defence speech come back to haunt her?
The mathematician and broadcaster, 42, was recruited as a Traitor by Maya Jama and James Acaster following the early banishment of actor Richard E. Grant.
However she has consistently raised the suspicion of the other players since then, and ended up as one of the top two contenders for banishment during episode four's round table, alongside actor and Coronation Street legend Julie Hesmondhalgh.
Her bold defence speech managed to win over the other celebs - but viewers at home, however, were convinced that a small but significant slip-up made by Fry could end up sealing her fate and bring about her banishment in the not-so-distant future...
How age could be silently influencing Celebrity Traitors decisions
There's a 47-year age gap between the youngest and oldest on this year's series of The Celebrity Traitors, but contestants on each side of the spectrum are having equally as hard a time as the other - and an expert has revealed that there's a reason for that.
It could be argued that being the youngest or eldest of the crop might work in one's favour, but so far, it's just getting them in trouble. Richard E Grant, 69, shot himself in the foot by letting his excitement get the better of him after declaring himself a Traitor to the group moments after Claudia Winkleman made him one. He swiftly got banished.
Then, the group successfully set its banishment sights on 30-year-old Industry star Myha'la, who sat on the younger side of the crop, while many others were casting doubt upon this year's oldest celeb, former model Jerry Hall, 70, who is proving to be equally as chaotic as Grant; she made a wholly innocent outburst at the breakfast table, which in turn confused everyone and has many convinced she's a Traitor.
My colleague Jacob Stolworthy has some pretty astute analysis as ever on why age might end up being a key factor in this year's competition...
A traitorous recap from last night
Good morning Faithfuls! Katie Rosseinsky here, logging on for your post-Traitors morning debrief. In case you need a little recap of what went down in the castle last night, I'm here to oblige.
- First, we learned that the Traitors had cruelly murdered Bella Ramsey, who made a real impression during their brief stint in the castle with their astute eye for suspicious behaviour. Gone far too soon!
- Then, Bella's in-castle pal Julie went absolutely OTT with her response to her mate's death - which certainly raised eyebrows among her fellow players.
- Claudia made an appearance to introduce the next challenge, in which half the group stood around chanting to "summon spirits" while the others scrabbled around in a crypt trying to solve clues. Things got particularly messy when Sebastian stuck his head down a toilet - not a sentence I expected to be writing 24 hours ago.
- At the round table, there were two main contenders for banishment: Faithful Julie and Traitor Hannah.
- The vote ended up in a near draw between the two, but it was Julie who ended up being sent home. Bless her, she was getting really, really into it.
- In another twist, the Traitors were then tasked with choosing four Faithfuls to take part in a creepy hide and seek game, in which they'll have the chance to murder one of them face to face.
- Ross, Romesh, Rob and Leigh-Anne were the unlikely quartet they picked - but the latter was given a special key that will protect her from murder, should the Traitors attempt to kill her off.
How the face-to-face murder will work
We're not even halfway through the series and the second face-to-face murder is about to take place!
The Traitors were asked to choose four celebrities who would enter crypts - and for once, they haven't chosen to put any of their own in the game.
Instead, it's Ross, Rob, Romesh and Leigh-Anne who have been summoned by Claudia in the middle of the night.
Before being placed in the crypts, the foursome have decided who to award a special key to. The key will grant that player immunity from murder, and they've gone for Leigh-Anne.
So if the Traitors decide to kill her, all four of the celebs in crypts will survive...
Traitors' cabin delivers another jaw-dropping moment
Last year, we had Celia Imrie passing wind. And this year, poor Miranda *checks notes* threw up into a toilet. Not such fun!
Appearing on Uncloaked, Julie was asked about Hannah's decision to defend her at the roundtable - while being under fire herself.
"It worked, didn't it?" Julie said. "Everyone was gunning for Hannah, then turned on me. I think it was the fact I got that shield [at the start].
"As I said several times, I thought I'd chosen the next Traitor."
Asked who she would have given the second shield to, if she hadn't kept it for herself back in episode one, Julie said Hannah. I wonder if that would have changed the game at all?
I have to say, Jerry's transformation from the most oblivious person in the castle to the only person who has clocked James Acaster is jaw-dropping.
Is it more luck than judgment? Probably. But it's impressive nonetheless.
Watch: Most trusted Faithful to banished...
Poor Julie!
Here's the moment when she left the game...