Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
Scotland kick off a new era under Sebastien Pocognoli as the Tartan Army face Slovenia in the Nations League.
The 39-year-old former Belgium international Pocognoli was a left-field replacement for Steve Clarke, who resigned following Scotland's group-stage exit form the World Cup.
Pocognoli has selected a new-look squad for the Nations League games against Slovenia, Switzerland and North Macedonia, with Scotland returning to League B of the competition.
He has promised a more energetic, front-foot style of play as Scotland look to the future and build up to Euro 2028, when they will be co-hosts.
Here's everything you need to know
When is Slovenia v Scotland?
Kick-off in Ljubljana is at 2pm BST on Saturday 26 September.
How can I watch it?
It will be shown on BBC One, with coverage from 1:45pm.
What is the team news?
In terms of absences, Pocognoli is without Scott McTominay, Che Adams and Lawrence Shankland, while Kieran Tierney and Kenny McLean also withdrew from the squad.
Hull City striker Oli McBurnie has been recalled to the Scotland squad and could make his first appearance since 2021, while Swansea defender Stephen Welsh, Celtic right-back Colby Donovan, Brondby defender Luis Binks, Stoke centre-back Luke Graham, Hearts winger Josh McPake and Sevilla striker Robbie Ure have all received their first call-ups.
McBurnie and Ure could feature in the attack, due to absences of Adams, Shankland and Steve Clarke favourite Lyndon Dykes, while Welsh and Binks could come straight into a new-look defence, potentially as part of a back-three.
Slovenia, meanwhile, will be without Manchester United striker Benjamin Sesko, who is still dealing with a shin issue.
Possible Scotland line-up
Gunn; Welsh, Binks, McKenna; Hickey, Ferguson, Gilmour, Robertson; McGinn; Ure, McBurnie