Thomas Tuchel has recalled Cole Palmer to the England squad this morning after the Chelsea forward was left out of the World Cup, with the German manager also making the huge call to restore Trent Alexander-Arnold ahead of three upcoming Nations League fixtures.
But Morgan Gibbs-White and Phil Foden have been snubbed, while Harry Maguire remains sidelined after his outspoken response to being left out of the World Cup squad, and eight players have been dropped altogether including Al-Ahli's Ivan Toney.
England made a rollercoaster run to the semi-finals of the World Cup in North America this summer, where they fell to a hugely disappointing defeat by arch rivals Argentina in Atlanta, giving up a one-goal lead with a defensive retreat for which Tuchel and his players were heavily criticised.
Now the England manager and his team have the chance to reset with bumper three-week international break as the 2026/27 Nations League campaign begins. The Three Lions are drawn in League 1, Group C with world champions Spain, Croatia and Czechia, and the group winner will qualify for the Nations League finals in June.
England host Spain at Wembley on 26 September, before away trips to Czechia on 29 September and Croatia on 3 October. The international break will wrap up on 6 October when Czechia visit Wembley for the return fixture.
Follow the latest updates and reaction, including Tuchel's views, ahead of the international break, below:
CONFIRMED: England squad in full as Palmer and Alexander-Arnold recalled
Goalkeepers: Jordan Pickford, James Trafford, Jason Steele
Defenders: Trent Alexander-Arnold, Tino Livramento, Jarrad Branthwaite, Trevoh Chalobah, Marc Guehi, Ezri Konsa, Jarell Quansah, Lewis Hall, Nico O'Reilly
Midfielders: Elliott Anderson, Jude Bellingham, Myles Lewis-Skelly, Kobbie Mainoo, Cole Palmer, Declan Rice, Alex Scott
Forwards: Harry Kane, Dominic Calvert-Lewin, Eberechi Eze, Anthony Gordon, Rio Ngumoha, Marcus Rashford, Morgan Rogers, Bukayo Saka
Tuchel recalls Palmer but his England place comes with a warning
It might be tempting to watch Cole Palmer dismantle Premier League defences this season and wonder exactly what Thoams Tuchel was thinking. The little first-time flick into Joao Pedro to score against Fulham and his own piercing finish under Bernd Leno. The surge of acceleration before wrapping the ball past Brighton's Bart Verbruggen from 20 yards. The intelligence to drift to the fringes where he could burst around Hull's defence and tee up Joao Pedro for another.
How did Tuchel not take this player to the World Cup? The answer, of course, is that this player didn't really exist last season. The timing of Palmer's dip in form was impossibly cruel. He racked up 42 goal contributions for Chelsea in 2023/24 and produced 32 more in 2024/25. But those figures dropped to only 14 goal contributions in 2025/26, including just two in the final 12 games of the season.
Clearly he never fully recovered from the groin injury which disrupted the start of the campaign. Tuchel didn't pick Cole Palmer for the World Cup because he wasn't really watching Cole Palmer, certainly not the same player who scored four goals against Brighton the previous season, for example, or the player who dismantled PSG in the Club World Cup final 12 months earlier, notably in the New Jersey stadium which would host the World Cup final.
When do England play next?
England head into an extended three-week international break across the end of September and beginning of October, during which they will play their first four matches of the new Nations League campaign.
The Three Lions return to action against world champions Spain on Saturday 26 September, their first match at Wembley since enduring World Cup heartbreak at the hands of Argentina in the semi-finals.
They then face trips to Czech Republic on Tuesday 29 September and Croatia four days later, before welcoming Czech Republic to Wembley in the reverse fixture on Tuesday 6 October.
See you then!
Tuchel stands with FA over Infantino
Rather unsurprisingly, Thomas Tuchel has stood with the FA in their opposition of Gianni Infantino over his botched World Cup sell-off scheme.
The FA have written to Fifa to officially withdraw their support for his presidential re-election and while Tuchel opted against going all-guns-blazing against the maligned Swiss-Italian, he nodded his head when asked if his position aligned with that of his bosses.
"I just told you I am backed by my bosses so the minimum I can do is back my bosses. They have my full support and I back their opinion," he said.
"I'm grateful I can talk about football. My little bit of knowledge is about football and not sport politics."
England injuries
With that press conference, we had confirmation on a couple of new England injuries, who join the casualty list along with a number of players from the World Cup squad who missed out this time. They are:
- Ben White (NEW) - hamstring
- Reece James (NEW) - unspecified
- Dean Henderson - ankle
- John Stones - thigh
- Djed Spence - fitness
- Dan Burn - ankle
- Jordan Henderson - wrist
Redemption for Mainoo?
Kobbie Mainoo was the only player included in the World Cup squad not to play a minute of football in the summer, with injury ruling him out of his best opportunity in the third-place play-off against France.
That hasn't cost him his place in Thomas Tuchel's roster, though - is this an opportunity for redemption?
"I expect him to be on the pitch and it's my duty to get him on the pitch," Tuchel confirmed. "That was totally on me. He didn't put a foot wrong during the World Cup.
"He was class in behaviour on the training pitch. There was big competition; we played Reece in central midfield also. Elliot Anderson is amazing for us, Declan Rice is a very unique player
"We trusted them more than we trusted Kobbie. It was difficult for him. It was on me.
Alexander-Arnold was 'never unselectable'
After Trent Alexander-Arnold was snubbed from World Cup selection, even after Tino Livramento got injured, we thought the Real Madrid man was well out of Thomas Tuchel's good books.
But no! Alexander-Arnold is back in the fold, and despite all the talk of Tuchel not trusting his defensive abilities, he comes explicitly as a defender.
"He was never off the list, he was never non-selectable for us and it's his chance to come to camp, to be the best version of himself," Tuchel said.
Later asked if he may be operated in midfield, he replied: "He comes as a right-back."
Players on Tuchel's radar
Thomas Tuchel didn't just talk about the newcomers in his press conference. As he said, "the door is open" for others.
He mentioned how Fulham's Josh King was "very close" to joining Alex Scott and Rio Ngumoha from the World Cup warm-up group in getting a first senior call-up, while also indicating that Morgan Gibbs-White and Levi Colwill was on his radar.
Chelsea hit by Reece James blow as Thomas Tuchel confirms injury
Reece James has suffered an injury which has ruled the Chelsea captain out of England's autumn international camp.
James missed training this week and Chelsea manager Xabi Alonso refused to shed any light on his fitness ahead of the Blues' trip to Brentford on Friday evening, saying on Thursday: "It was just a decision and we see his development, and tomorrow we will decide."
But James is unlikely to take any part in the match at the Gtech Stadium, having been left out of Tuchel's first squad since the World Cup.