Eddie Howe is to leave Newcastle, just weeks before the start of the new Premier League season.
Howe guided Newcastle to their first domestic trophy in 70 years when they won the Carabao Cup in 2025.
But the 48-year-old's departure comes just hours after a 4-1 pre-season defeat to Bristol City.
Newcastle are yet to officially comment on Howe's departure.
David Ornstein of The Athletic reported that Howe told Newcastle that he wants to take a break after almost five years in charge.
Last season was a disappointing campaign for Newcastle. They finished 12th and failed to qualify for European football.
The Magpies have sold Anthony Gordon and Sandro Tonali this summer, while captain Bruno Guimaraes has been linked with Arsenal.
None of Newcastle's new signings, such as Aladji Bamba and Bazoumana Toure, are older than 20 as the club look to the future.
Howe led Newcastle to great heights after replacing Steve Bruce as manager in November 2021, when the club were 19th in the table.
They qualified for the Champions League for the first time in 19 years in 2022-23 and secured their best league finish, fourth, in two decades.
After reaching the Carabao Cup final in 2023, Howe's team went one step further two years later as they beat Liverpool to win silverware at Wembley.
The victory, secured by Dan Burn and Alexander Isak, ended Newcastle's long wait for a domestic trophy, which stretched back to the FA Cup in 1955.
Newcastle's difficult campaign last season began as star striker Isak was sold to Liverpool for a British transfer record fee, following a protracted transfer saga.
Howe's side lost 10 of their final 16 Premier League games of the and suffered a heavy 8-3 aggregate defeat to Barcelona in the knockout stages of the Champions League.
Howe, though, was backed following talks with Newcastle's majority owners, Saudi Arabia's Public Investment Fund (PIF), and looked set to begin the new season in charge.
At some stage during the summer, however, Howe appeared to change his mind and decided to leave the Newcastle. The club, meanwhile, are said to have prepared for his exit.
German coach Matthias Jaissle is the leading candidate to replace Howe. Jaissle, 38, is the current coach of Al Ahli in the Saudi Pro League. Al Ahli are also owned by the PIF.
Jaissle faces an immediate rebuild following another summer where Newcastle have sold senior players.
The club sold Gordon to Barcelona for around £69m and Tonali to Tottenham for £100m while captain Guimaraes is a target for Premier League champions Arsenal.
More follows