A man has died and at least six others have been injured after a sign fell on visitors at a Christian festival in West Sussex.
The tragic incident took place at Big Church Festival, near Steyning on Friday afternoon.
Sussex Police said officers were called to the site on Washington Road at about 3.38pm to reports that a large sign had fallen and injured a number of people.
On Friday evening, police confirmed a 41-year-old man from Eastbourne died at the scene. His next of kin have been informed and are being supported by specialist officers.
Detective Chief Superintendent Richard McDonagh said: "This is a tragic incident and our thoughts go out to the man's family and friends at this incredibly difficult time.
"At least six other people were also injured during this incident and have been taken to hospital for treatment.
"I recognise the immense distress this will have caused people at the festival, and we are working with a number of partners as we seek to establish exactly what happened.
"We know there were thousands of people at the festival and we're urging anyone with any information, or any relevant video footage, to please come forward. You can report it online or call 101, quoting Operation Igloo."
In an Instagram update posted shortly after 5.30pm, event organisers informed attendees that Friday's entertainment had been cancelled, adding that all day visitors "must leave the site now".
South East Coast Ambulance Service (Secamb) said its crews were called to reports that "multiple people" needed medical attention.
"Ambulance crews, critical care paramedics and specialist response teams are currently on scene with six patients confirmed so far," a Secamb spokesperson said.
"We have no further information to share at this time but will provide updates as soon as possible."
The festival began on Friday and had been set to run until Sunday, but has been cancelled following the tragic incident.
A statement from Big Church Festival said: "We are devastated by the serious incident that took place at Big Church Festival 2026 today, in which a sign fell, injuring at least seven people, one of whom tragically lost their life.
"First and foremost, all of our thoughts are with those who have been affected, their families and friends, and everyone who witnessed what happened. Following today's incident, we have made the decision to bring Big Church Festival 2026 to a close."
"If you are camping with us, please return to your campsite and await further updates.
"Campers may leave the site if they wish to do so.
"Thank you for your patience and understanding. We will share further updates as soon as we can."
According to its website, Big Church Festival was founded in 2009 and is the UK's biggest Christian festival.
Lauren Daigle, CeCe Winans, Bethel Music and Elevation Rhythm are among the act scheduled to perform.
The Met Office had urged festivalgoers to prepare for windy conditions over the bank holiday weekend.
According to its UK weather map, wind speeds of up to 27mph were recorded in Shoreham, West Sussex, on Friday afternoon.