Andy Burnham is facing increasing pressure to ramp up defence spending after Donald Trump suggested he would not back Britain if Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands, in retaliation for the UK's stance on the Iran war.
As the row over the sovereignty of the archipelago deepens, Mr Trump again hit out at what he sees as a failure to support his actions in Iran when asked if he would come to the aid of the UK.
"Your country was not there to help me," he told GB News on Thursday, just days after he said he was reviewing the United States' position on British sovereignty over the islands.
It comes as the prime minister faces increasing scrutiny on how he will fund defence amid warnings that the US is no longer a reliable ally on security.
The Labour chair of the Commons defence select committee, Tan Dhesi told The Independent the UK "should be under no illusion that we face a significantly higher threat level, so rather than be sorry later, we must properly invest in our defence now".
Mr Dhesi's second intervention in as many days comes after Argentina's president - a close ally of Mr Trump - issued a fresh warning to the UK over the islands, saying his country would defend its interests "with tooth and nail, no matter who it bothers".
Javier Milei said he would make a national announcement on its position on Thursday night, adding that the islands were "sacred" and his country's national sovereignty had been "violated".
Falkland Islanders voted overwhelmingly to remain a British overseas territory in a 2013 referendum, with 99.8 per cent voting in favour - and just three votes against.
Asked in an interview with GB News on Thursday whether he would support the UK in the event of another invasion, Mr Trump said he clearly remembered the 1982 war.
"I was there when they had the first war; that was a long time ago... you comported yourself very well, took it back very shortly. But it is a long way away," he said.
"So, your country's not doing well. Don't forget you get a big percentage of your oil from the Strait of Hormuz and you weren't there to help me. Your country was not there to help me."
The UK initially refused to take part in the US-Israeli offensive against Iran, when Sir Keir Starmer was prime minister.
Sir Keir later agreed to support "defensive" strikes against targets such as missile launchers, but did not back Mr Trump's call to send the navy to reopen the Strait of Hormuz. In response, President Trump repeatedly hit out at Sir Keir, branding him at one point "no Churchill".
The government has delayed its plan for raising defence expenditure until a review in the spring, despite increasing pressure amid the threat Russia poses to Nato countries, including the UK. Mr Trump has already said he is unwilling to defend Europe from an attack by Russia and told Nato allies they must start funding defence properly.
On Wednesday, Mr Dhesi warned that the UK faces a "US leadership for whom European security is no longer a focus or a priority" as he urged Mr Burnham to find the extra money required to keep Britain safe, saying it was one one area "where vibes alone just isn't going to be enough."
On Thursday, Tory leader Kemi Badenoch outlined her party's plans to raise £10bn a year for defence spending, largely through sweeping welfare cuts.
She warned that hostile states, such as Russia, are "constantly pushing the boundaries" and said the UK needed to be strong to protect itself.
"We need to be strong. If you want peace, you prepare for war," she added.
Labour hit back and said the party's "so-called 'further' cuts to welfare were all announced last year. You can't spend money twice".
Meanwhile, No 10 insists the UK's position on the Falklands is "long-standing and unwavering".
In a statement on X, formerly Twitter, on Wednesday the Argentina's president wrote: "We announce a national broadcast for Thursday at 9:00 PM on a SACRED topic for Argentinians... a historic claim of the Argentine people that to this day continues to see its national sovereignty violated."
He added: "What more important and strategic cause for the vital interests of the nation could there be more important than the Malvinas cause?... We will continue defending the interests of the Argentine nation with tooth and nail, no matter who it bothers. LONG LIVE FREEDOM, DAMMIT...!!!"
The issue hit the headlines this summer when Argentina's football team controversially waved a banner in support of their country's claim to the islands while celebrating their World Cup win against England. Players held a banner after the semi-final match that read "Las Malvinas son Argentinas", which translates as "The Falklands are Argentine".