One person died and at least 16 others were injured after a car drove into a crowd during Berlin's LGBTQ+ parade on Saturday evening.
Berlin fire brigade said that three of the victims were in life-threatening condition, while eight were in serious condition, per Sky News.
A suspect in the Berlin attack was identified in the early hours of Sunday morning as a member of the city's "Islamist scene", according to police. Police and prosecutors asked for help in finding the 21-year-old, whom they identified as Abdul B.
"We have now identified a suspected perpetrator. Measures against this suspected perpetrator, who has not yet been arrested, are underway. However, this suspected perpetrator is known to the police as a member of the Islamist scene here in Berlin," said the spokesperson.
According to police, a car had driven into the Tiergarten park, near the route of the pride march, hitting several people.
Hundreds of thousands of people had come to Berlin on Saturday to celebrate at Berlin's pride parade, known in Germany as Christopher Street Day. It's one of Europe's largest LGBTQ+ celebrations.
Police name 21-year-old suspect in Berlin Pride attack
German authorities on Sunday issued a wanted notice for a fugitive suspect in the van ramming near Berlin's Pride festival that left one person dead and injured at least 16 others.
Police and prosecutors asked for help in finding the 21-year-old, whom they identified as Abdul B.
They said he is believed to have injured several people with a moving vehicle, and that one or more people apparently then left that vehicle. Several people were also apparently stabbed, they added.
Sunday's notice warned the public to avoid "direct contact" with the suspect, saying that he may be armed and dangerous.
Police had said earlier that they had identified a suspect who has ties to Islamic groups in the German capital."The suspect is known to police. He is known to us as a member of Islamic circles here in Berlin, and our search for this person is proceeding at full speed," police spokesperson Florian Nath said.
Nath added that "we still have no information whatsoever regarding his specific motives, the exact sequence of events, or his role in the crime itself."
Wes Streeting: 'Horrific' attack shows why Pride marches are important
Britain's defence secretary Wes Streeting has described the attack in Berlin as an "absolutely horrific disaster".
Discussing Pride marches, he told Sky's Sunday Morning with Trevor Phillips: "In many respects, things are different and better now than they've ever been... But hate crimes are also on the rise. There are lots of people who don't accept diversity and difference in our society.
"And that's why pride is a celebration. But it's also a protest against those who do not accept life in the 21st century, do not accept people loving each other in same-sex relationships and in the very worst cases would seek to do us harm."
Asked about safety at next week's annual Brighton Pride celebrations, he said "these types of events are always well policed".
RECAP: Manhunt for Berlin Pride attack suspect who may be 'armed and dangerous'
- Police in Germany are hunting for a man suspected of ramming a van into a crowd at an LGBTQ+ parade in Berlin on Saturday evening, with several people also reportedly stabbed
- One person died and at least 16 others were injured. Berlin fire brigade said that three of the victims were in life-threatening condition, while eight were in serious condition
- Police have released a picture of the suspect, who they have identified as 21-year-old Abdul B, but warned the public he may be armed and dangerous
- Chancellor Friedrich Merz described the incident as an "attack on our society" as police said the investigation is continuing at "full speed"
'Tolerant and peaceful' Berlin was attacked in most 'brutal way', mayor says
The mayor of Berlin, Kai Wegner, said the "brutal" incident was "an attack on our free and open society" and the "tolerant and peaceful" city.
In a post on X, he said: "Berlin is the city of freedom - and our freedom has been attacked in the most horrific way today. My thoughts are with the victims, their families and friends.
"I thank the emergency services who were immediately on site and did everything in their power. And I trust the police and security authorities, who will investigate at full speed."
Incident was an 'attack on our society', Merz says
German Chancellor Friedrich Merz described what happened as "an attack on our society."
"What an abhorrent act in Berlin," Merz wrote in a post on X. He added that Germany loves freedom, "and we will preserve and defend that."
Hundreds of thousands of people had come to Berlin on Saturday to celebrate at Berlin's pride parade, known in Germany as Christopher Street Day.
Photo released of suspect identified as Abdul B
Police have identified a 21-year-old suspect called Abdul B in connection with the incident.
He is described as slim build, approximately 1.90 m tall, black hair, black hoodie and white pants.
Several people suffering from 'life-threatening' injuries, say police
Berlin police report that one person has been killed and 17 people injured following a ramming incident at a Pride event on Saturday evening.
This includes "several with life-threatening injuries", according to police.