Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
Australia held on with 11 men in a dramatic finish to beat a second-string South Africa outfit 42-38 at Perth Stadium on Sunday and extend their unbeaten run to five games since new coach Les Kiss took over in late July. Skipper Harry Wilson, Ryan Lonergan, Joseph Suaalii and Hunter Paisami were all shown yellow cards in the last 10 minutes as the world champions cut a 25-point deficit down to four at the final whistle.
Australia had looked to be cruising after centre Len Ikitau's double and tries from flyhalf Ben Donaldson, number eight Wilson and winger Max Jorgensen combined with 17 points from the boot of scrumhalf Ryan Lonergan gave them a 42-17 lead after 65 minutes. The last 10 minutes threatened to undo all their earlier good work but the Wallabies will move on to back-to-back tests against the All Blacks in October without a loss in six games, their best unbeaten run since 2017.
South Africa coach Rassie Erasmus had made 13 changes to his lineup from the team that completed the gruelling 3-1 series victory over New Zealand earlier this month but stacked his bench with first-choice players as an insurance policy. It almost paid off in the frantic last 10 minutes, but scores from hooker Johan Grobbelaar, winger Edwill van der Merwe, scrumhalf Morne van den Berg, prop Ox Nche as well as a penalty try were not quite enough.
The visitors scored the first try after Handre Pollard and Lonergan had exchanged early penalties with Grobbelaar rolling over the line on the back of a rolling maul. Australia responded with two tries from Ikitau in three minutes, the first from close range and the second after winger Suaalii had disrupted the restart and the ball bounced back to the lurking centre. The Springboks responded almost immediately to lock up the scores again at 17-17, flyhalf Pollard's long pass exposing a hole in the Australian backline defence and Van der Merwe showing his pace to finish the move.
A slanted crosskick from Wallabies fullback Tom Wright gave Jorgensen some space to run shortly before halftime, however, and Australia recycled patiently when the winger was held up shy of the line with Donaldson going over unopposed in the corner after 14 phases. Lonergan extended Australia's lead with his second penalty eight minutes into the second half, prompting Erasmus to bring on all eight of his replacements, and added a third three-pointer after 54 minutes to make it 30-17.
The Wallabies were now taking the Springboks on up front and tapped a penalty close to the line just before the hour mark with Wilson forcing his way over and slapping the ball down for a try. The Springboks stormed back to try and cut the 20-point deficit but when Canan Moodie spilled the ball, Jorgensen was on hand to scoop it up and sprint 60 metres for Australia's fifth try. Reuters.
Springboks coach admits they 'rolled the dice' in Australia
Rassie Erasmus noted: "When you're 25 points behind, there's nobody else to blame but yourself. We rolled the dice a bit, and some guys haven't played a lot together in a long time, but it's not an excuse.
"We picked the team, and we had a game plan, and I thought we had a chance at the end, but the better team won on the night. It's sad to lose, but it's not because we've been together too long. It's because we didn't play well enough."
Rassie Erasmus in honest assessment of Springboks
"For us, we lost in a Springbok jersey against Australia, and with all the disruptions, we have nobody else to blame but ourselves for the result," said Erasmus.
"I know the technology failed a bit, the clock kept running and didn't stop at times for example, but that didn't influence how we played. We controlled that. We didn't play well enough tonight to beat a stronger team."
Wallabies legend reacts to huge win over South Africa
Michael Hooper: "A few text messages, one was, 'what sport are we watching?'
"They deserves to be further ahead, the yellow cards were harsh. They controlled the possession.
"The forced South Africa into discipline issues, they were up for it. So happy to hear the words from Harry Wilson, what it means to them."
Wallabies captain Harry Wilson reacts to historic win over world champions
"I'm so proud of the group, mate, we're excited, up for it, that first 70 minutes, way we played, exactly what we wanted, so proud of the boys," says Harry Wilson.
"We knew as a forward pack, we had to step up, we had to back ourselves, we have some special players, and in space, they can do special things."
Boks captain Andre Esterhuizen reacts to gripping test match
Boks captain Andre Esterhuizen: "It was a very intense game, quite quick for a test match. It let us down, we let them in too much. It hurt us.
"We were too disjointed, discipline, the key factor that let us down.
"The last 18-19 weeks, we know each other well, the plan well, it's about executing. Proud of the fight at the end, but we need to be better than that."
FT: Australia 42-38 South Africa
AUSTRALIA SURVIVE, AUSTRALIA WIN!
South Africa thought they had one last chance, but obstruction and the Wallabies boot it into touch. Stunning.
TRY! Australia 42-38 South Africa (Ox Nche), 80 minutes
Etzebeth held up, his body is over the try line.
Marx bundling through the Australia backline, SOUTH AFRICA TRY!
Nche sprints back, the conversion is good, time for a restart, can you believe this?
Australia 42-31 South Africa, 78 minutes
This is chaotic!
Esterhuizen thought he was about to score, Wright gathers the loose ball, booting upfield.
Australia are desperate, up by 11, with 11 men on the field.
The Boks overthrow the line-out, remarkable, a lifeline for the Wallabies.