A beloved ferry connecting the UK mainland to a subtropical archipelago will retire this year after nearly half a century of transporting passengers.
The Scillonian III has sailed on the 28-mile journey from the Cornish coast to St Mary's, the largest of the Isles of Scilly, for some 49 years, taking two hours and 45 minutes.
Now, it is set to be replaced by a new vessel after the season comes to an end in November.
The Isles of Scilly Steamship Group has invested £40m in a replacement ship for a more modern transport link between the islands and the mainland.
The new 72-metre Scillonian IV passenger ferry will carry 600 passengers, an increase of 115, across three decks, with a new seating arrangement, an onboard coffee shop and a retail area.
The new ship is expected to reduce journey times and improve comfort onboard with "roll and pitch" reduction systems which minimise rocking. The sea crossing to the Isles of Scilly is notoriously known to be difficult for those susceptible to motion sickness due to the meeting of currents.
The Scillonian IV entered sea trials this week in Vietnam and, once successfully completed, will start making its way to the UK.
Isles of Scilly Steamship Group Board Member, Sam Hicks, said: "While Scillonian IV looks magnificent, the real pleasure for passengers will be in the experience she offers. This represents a step change in comfort and service.
"New technology such as the hull vane has been incorporated to improve fuel efficiency and reduce pitching in heavy seas, alongside active roll‐fin stabilisers, which is a technology we've not benefited from on previous vessels. Together, this should make a noticeable difference to passenger comfort.
"On board, standards have been set high, with improved seating, air conditioning, sound management for a quieter journey, large windows, and generous deck spaces.
"Scillonian IV is not just a beautiful ship; she represents confidence in the future of the Isles of Scilly."
The new 75-metre-long vessel will start ferrying passengers in March 2027.