A former Thai MP has claimed responsibility for a shooting at a local government office in Nonthaburi province, just days after the same region witnessed a major school shooting incident in which at least nine people died.
Two people, including a senior provincial official and his driver, have been injured in the attack that happened outside the provincial office's building.
Police said Chalong Reawraeng, a former lawmaker from Thailand's Nonthaburi province, has been arrested. His alleged target, Thongchai Yenprasert, is president of the Nonthaburi Provincial Administrative Organisation.
The victim and his driver have been hospitalised after being shot, with several local media reports suggesting they were seriously injured.
"There were two people wounded, who have been sent to hospital for treatment," major general Dejrapee Kongdee, the police commander of Nonthaburi, which borders Bangkok, said.
More follows
Shooter apologises, calls victim a 'good friend'
The alleged shooter, Chalong Reawraeng, has apologised to the family and friends of Thongchai Yenprasert in a press conference from the police station after he was arrested.
He called him a "good friend" but said he was angry with him for money-related issues.
"I told him to take responsibility on this. If you don't have [the money] now, you can pay in instalments to my children... I told him I'm in trouble," he said.
"He then pushed me, saying 'I don't want to talk, I don't want to talk.
"He said he then followed him to his car with a gun, but claims he did not do so with the intention of shooting him.
"When I pulled the gun out, I didn't intend to shoot him. But then [Thongchai's driver] pulled his gun out and pointed it at me, so I fired."
"I'd like to apologise to the people of Nonthaburi who loved the PAO chief, or his family, or any other people," he said, referring to Provincial Administrative Organisation.
"I didn't intend to do anything, because he's a good friend of mine, but he didn't want to talk to me," he said.
"My family will be in deep sorrow. My daughter will surely be heartbroken," he said.
"They wouldn't think this is something I would have done."
Former lawmaker claims responsibility for attack
A well-known former lawmaker, Chalong Reawraeng, has claimed responsibility for the attack.
He first claimed it in a phone call to a popular political commentator, who was livestreaming on YouTube at the time, and later at a press conference.
During the call, the presenter Anchalee Paireerak asked the lawmaker: "Did he die? Did he die? You shot him in the head? You need to wait there for the cops."
She appeared visibly shocked, while viewers were not able to hear the caller.
Shooter has been arrested, police say
Police said Chalong Reawraeng, a former lawmaker from Thailand's Nonthaburi province, has been arrested. His alleged target, Thongchai Yenprasert, is president of the Nonthaburi Provincial Administrative Organisation.
The victim and his driver have been hospitalised after being shot, with several local media reports suggesting they were seriously injured.
"There were two people wounded, who have been sent to hospital for treatment," major general Dejrapee Kongdee, the police commander of Nonthaburi, which borders Bangkok, said.
Thailand rocked by second shooting in days as former MP opens fire
A former Thai MP has claimed responsibility for a shooting at a local government office in Nonthaburi province, just days after the same region witnessed a major school shooting incident in which at least nine people died.
Two people, including a senior provincial official and his driver, have been injured in the attack that happened outside the provincial office's building.