Ariana Grande has become the latest musician to take a stand against President Donald Trump using her music in his promotional videos.
On Thursday, the Team Trump TikTok account shared a video depicting Trump walking the podium at a rally, soundtracked to the singer's 2024 hit "We Can't Be Friends (Wait For Your Love)."
The video was overlaid with the text: "Me and my truth we sit in silence...Men can't have babies and should never compete in women's sports."
The post's caption said: "This shouldn't be controversial! #trump #arianagrande #maga."
According to People, Grande shared a comment on the post demanding that his team stop using her music to promote his campaign and challenged the claims made in the post.
"Never use my music again. Also, your truth is false," she wrote. The comment is no longer visible.
Grande's song has since been removed from the post by the copyright owner.
In the U.S. version of the TikTok app, a message on the video reads: "The copyright owner hasn't made this sound available in your country." The Independent has contacted the White House and representatives for Grande for comment.
The Team Trump TikTok account, which has 14 million followers, was created ahead of the 2024 U.S. presidential election.
In June, Grande called out the White House for using her song "Bye" in a social media post promoting ICE arrests, and described the video as "barbaric."
The video used Grande's song "Bye" as background audio and was captioned: "Bye-bye. President Trump has delivered the most secure border in history."
According to Variety, she commented on the post: "Please do not ever use my music in relation to this barbaric, inhumane, heinous nonsense. F*** ICE." At the time, her representatives told the publication that she had indeed posted the comment, but "for some reason it's not publicly visible."
Multiple musicians have publicly objected to their music being used by Trump on both the White House and Team Trump social media accounts.
Earlier this month, Taylor Swift quietly removed her song "August" from a Team Trump TikTok depicting Donald and Melania Trump standing on a balcony watching fireworks with the text: "Mood because it's August and Donald Trump is your president."
The caption read: "I'm sure @Taylor Swift is going to be super excited we used her song! #taylorswift #maga #august."
Fans noticed shortly after that Swift's track, from her 2020 album Folklore, was removed from the post by the copyright owner.
In December, Sabrina Carpenter condemned the White House's use of her song "Juno" in an ICE arrest video as "evil and disgusting", adding: "Do not ever involve me or my music to benefit your inhumane agenda."
A month earlier, Olivia Rodrigo criticized the White House and the Department of Homeland Security after officials used her song "All-American B****" in a video urging undocumented migrants to "self-deport", writing: "Don't ever use my songs to promote your racist, hateful propaganda."
Grande is currently on the last leg of her Eternal Sunshine tour after the release of her latest album Petal. Earlier this month, she announced through a representative that she would be stepping back from public life following the completion of the tour on September 1.
Hinting at the ongoing discourse around her health and body she's faced in recent years, the statement said: "She looks forward to finishing the tour and ending it on a high note, both healthily and happily, and then taking a much-deserved break from public-facing work and appearances, which has led to endless, ongoing public scrutiny."