A child and three firefighters have been taken to hospital as fires tore through homes in the West Midlands, where a local councillor described the scene as "apocalyptic".
On the hottest day of the year, with temperatures soaring to 38.1C in Kew Gardens, more than 100 firefighters were tackling huge fires in the Stourbridge and Stratford-upon-Avon areas.
At Stourbridge golf course, an "extensive grass fire" spread across roads in places with people urged to stay indoors.
West Midlands Fire Service said that multiple houses caught fire and people were evacuated from their homes. The organisation said a child and three firefighters were taken to hospital.
Councillor Andrew Tromans, who represents Wollaston and Stourbridge Town on Dudley Borough Council, described the scene of the fire in Stourbridge as "apocalyptic".
Meanwhile, in Stratford-upon-Avon a major incident was declared at the scene of a wildfire. Warwickshire Fire and Rescue Service were called at 2.30pm to reports of a large plume of smoke on Tothall Lane, Salford Priors.
The Met Office has issued an amber extreme heat warning for much of England, covering parts of the south and east, as well as swathes of the Midlands.
How areas across the Midlands have been hit by wildfires
Areas across the West Midlands have been hit by the affects of wildfire.
- In Worcestershire, Hereford & Worcester Fire and Rescue Service said a number of homes had been damaged and 30 properties were evacuated in Pershore following a large fire on Lancelott Court. The fire service said one person was treated for smoke inhalation following the incident at about 4.30pm, and about 200 homes in the area were left without power.
- In Stoke-on-Trent in Staffordshire, another blaze hit "a small number of properties and gardens" in the Goldenhill area of the city.
- Severn Trent Water warned of disruption to water supply across the West Midlands as a result of the wildfires.
- The company said customers in Kidsgrove, near Stoke-on-Trent, may experience lower pressure and discoloured water because firefighters needed to use hydrants.
- In Warwickshire, the county's fire and rescue service said it was responding to a "large fire" in Salford Priors, Stratford-upon-Avon, which has been declared a major incident.
- Wildfires forced the closure of the M6 northbound between junctions five and six - causing more than two hours of delays.
West Midlands fire crews are 'making progress'
Fire crews are making progress tackling huge blazes in the West Midlands that led to thousands of 999 calls and caused "extensive" devastation, a fire chief said.
Chief fire officer Simon Tuhill, of West Midlands Fire Service, said one huge blaze in Stourbridge, which forced some people to flee after it started tearing through homes, was "one of the most significant" incidents the region's fire service has ever dealt with.
An update from West Midlands Fire Service on Friday morning said crews were "making progress" and "tactically working across several different areas of the site".
Watch: Stourbridge residents scramble with buckets to douse fire hotspots
ICYMI: Burnham thanks emergency services over 'awful' fires
Andy Burnham said he was in touch with local leaders in the West Midlands as firefighters continue to bring several wildfires in the region under control.
He said in a statement: "Awful to see homes and communities hit by fires across the country tonight as the heatwave continues.
"My thoughts are with everyone affected, particularly those who have been injured or forced from their homes, and with the firefighters who have been taken to hospital.
"I'm in touch with local leaders (including West Midlands Mayor Richard Parker) and will be speaking to emergency services on the ground as they continue their response.
"Our firefighters are working in incredibly difficult conditions and putting themselves at risk to keep others safe. A huge thank you to them and everyone supporting the effort tonight.
"Please stay safe and follow their advice."
Recap: West Midlands hit by fires on hottest day of the year
Huge blazes across the West Midlands led to "apocalyptic" scenes and led to thousands of 999 calls, a fire chief has said.
One of the fires, in Stourbridge, left "extensive" devastation and was "one of the most significant" incidents West Midlands Fire Service has ever dealt with.
Three members of fire service personnel and one child had been taken to hospital, while six members of the public were treated for smoke inhalation.
Many were also forced to flee after blazes tore through their homes on the UK's hottest day of the year.
Also, a major blaze in nearby Pershore, Worcestershire, damaged a number of houses and forced the evacuation of 30 properties as temperatures rose across the UK.
And in Goldenhill area of Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire, emergency crews tackled a separate incident that struck "a small number of properties and gardens".
'It's hard to breathe', resident says on fire
Resident Phillip Jones, who lives close to where the fire in Stourbridge has taken hold, told Sky News: "We noticed the smoke about one o'clock this afternoon, coming back from an orthodontist appointment and it just got thicker and thicker.
"It was quite hard to breathe, actually, when we left the car, getting to the home. I am at home and have locked up all the windows.
"There has been a steady stream of fire engines, police cars, helicopters above. A number of roads have been closed, a number of our friends have been evacuated from their homes.
"We have the golf course and then the cricket club between us and the fire. So, at the moment, we have grab bags by the door, ready to leave if we have to leave, but it hasn't come to that yet, thankfully for us."
Warning over water supply in West Midlands
Severn Trent Water has warned of disruption to water supply across the West Midlands region as firefighters continue to battle wildfires.
In Kidsgrove, near Stoke-On-Trent, the utility said because fire services needed to use hydrants, customers may experience lower water pressure and discoloured water.
In a statement on its website about the current situation across the West Midlands, the company said: "We're aware of the ongoing fire incidents in our region and are on site supporting emergency services as they respond.
"Our teams are assisting emergency responders and carrying out checks on our assets in the area to ensure they remain safe and operating as expected.
"We understand this will be concerning for local residents and would like to reassure customers that we are working closely with the emergency services and providing any support required.
"Some customers in the area may experience lower water pressure, no water supply or discoloured water while emergency services continue their response."
"We apologise for any inconvenience this may cause and thank customers for their patience while the incident is ongoing."
Wildfires are 'one of the most significant' incidents regional fire service has dealt wtih
The wildfires across the West Midlands have been "one of the most significant" incidents the region's fire service has ever dealt with, chief fire officer Simon Tuhill said.
He told a press conference on Thursday evening: "This has been one of the most significant incidents that West Midlands Fire Service has ever attended.
"The devastation is extensive.
"We understand the impact that will have on the residents and the local community.
"We want to reassure everyone: we will do everything we can to minimise that and, of course, get people back into their homes.
"However, it is the case that the emergency service presence here will likely run in two days and that means, unfortunately, asking people to stay away for that period."
Investigation begins on how fire started in Stourbridge
An investigation into how the fire in Stourbridge started will be carried out, the region's fire chief Simon Tuhill has said.
Asked by a reporter at the scene of the blaze how the fire started, he said: "At this stage, too early to say.
"Of course, we will carry out a joint investigation with police colleagues and our specialist fire investigation team.
"They will be here on scene as soon as they can to start investigating the possible cause."
Asked by another reporter where the Stourbridge fire started, he added: "We think at this moment the fire started not in one of the homes and spread to the fields, but from the grassland and into the homes."