Arsenal could turn their attention to Brighton's £51m-rated midfielder Jack Hinshelwood as they continue talks with Bayer Leverkusen over signing England international Jarell Quansah. The Premier League champions have been keen to sign a defender following the injury to William Saliba and the 23-year-old Quansah, formerly of Liverpool, would be able to cover both centre-back and right back positions.
Meanwhile, Barcelona are set to make a third bid of around £60m for Rodri, but are still set to fall £10m short of Manchester City's valuation of the Ballon d'Or winner. The deal could yet influence the speed of any move for Enzo Fernandez, with his former Chelsea manager Enzo Maresca pushing for the midfielder's signature. Chelsea's deadline of 5pm on Friday passed without City submitting their £120m bid, and the club expect Fernandez - who was booed by Chelsea fans on his return to Stamford Bridge on Saturday - to now stay for the upcoming season.
Tottenham have agreed personal terms with Liverpool forward Cody Gakpo, according to reports in the Netherlands, while Spurs are also close to signing Manchester City winger Savinho and have joined Manchester United and Arsenal in expressing interest in Galatasaray forward Victor Osimhen. Arsenal's Gabriel Martinelli has rejected the chance to join the Turkish club as part of a deal.
In other news, Tottenham captain Cristian Romero has completed his transfer to Atletico Madrid, while Paris Saint-Germain have confirmed the signing of Ferran Torres, the scorer of the winning goal in the World Cup final, from Barcelona. Crystal Palace have completed the signing of right-sided player Anan Khalaili on a five-year contract.
Follow all of the latest news, rumours and done deals below
Arsenal news: Jarrel Quansah talks, Ethan Nwaneri future?
Arsenal have expressed an interest in signing Jarell Quansah and have opened talks with Bayer Leverkusen over a move for the England international.
Mikel Arteta wants to add a defender to his squad following the injury to William Saliba and there is a gap between Arsenal and Aston Villa when it comes to the valuation of Ezri Konsa.
Quansah, who joined Leverkusen from Liverpool last summer, can play at both centre-back and right-back, so fits what Arteta wants from a member of his defence.
Meanwhile, Mikel Arteta has admitted that Ethan Nwaneri may have to leave Arsenal to find the regular football he needs to fulfil his potential.
Arsenal are also in contention to sign Brighton midfielder Jack Hinshelwood, according to The Sun. Hinshelwood can play across the midfield as well as at full-back.
While a deal for Myles Lewis-Skelly to Chelsea or Manchester United is considered highly unlikely.
Chelsea news: Liam Delap attracts interest from Como
Italian side Como have expressed their interest in signing Chelsea striker Liam Delap, according to the Mail.
Chelsea are set to demand £50m for the 23-year-old striker, who is also of interest to several Premier League teams.
Como will be playing in the Champions League next season under Cesc Fabregas and have also agreed a deal to sign Chelsea defender Trevoh Chalobah.
Meanwhile, Napoli have agreed a deal Benoit Badiashile on an initial loan.
TalkSport reported that Coventry are keen on signing 20-year-old defender Josh Acheampong, while the Independent understands Hull City have interest in Tosin Adarabioyo, but he wants to stay.
As Gianni Infantino clings to power, football as you know it could be about to change
Moves to reduce the power of the Fifa presidency could in turn lead to the growing influence of Europe's biggest clubs and how they decide to shape the game, writes Miguel Delaney in his latest Inside Football newsletter
Jeff Bezos is buying into Liverpool - this is why
As the consortium that has reached a "definitive agreement" to buy a 30 per cent stake in Liverpool continues to generate noise, Amazon founder Jeff Bezos is described by industry figures as a mere "silent partner".
It's perhaps apt given the lack of actual explanation or intention behind this, despite all the commotion.
The entry of one of the world's wealthiest men into football has naturally stoked a lot of emotion, not least from the supporter group Spirit of Shankly. They have written to Liverpool asking for clarity, having warned how previous changes in the running of the club have led to "decisions and behaviours that many would not want to see at Liverpool".
For all the inevitable focus on the hard figures of the numbers, and the influence of Bezos's own wealth, there's a sense this is all about something much bigger. "It just looks like a power/political play over an investment decision," one well-placed source says.
Holding part of an "asset" in a sphere of such increasing social and political importance gives you entry into another world, as the recent World Cup made clear. It has become a solid platform for the highest politics. That is one of many reasons why beleaguered Fifa president Gianni Infantino won't resign.
Football itself is morphing, which is why there is such an unstable time at the top. That attracts the interest of figures like Bezos, who are likely to change it more. The world is increasingly centring on football, as its single global sport, so the world's biggest conglomerates are getting involved. Such concentrations of interest and wealth are inevitable.
Tijjani Reijnders's Manchester City exit is a parable of modern football
Tijjani Reijnders's fleeting time at Manchester City is almost over. The Dutch international is on the verge of joining Saudi Arabian club Al Qadsiah in a transfer worth around £55m. Will he lift the "Pride of the Eastern Province" to Saudi Pro League glory? Who knows? Also: who cares?
Amid the summer transfer churn, perhaps it is not a particularly eye-catching or noteworthy deal. City will make a small profit on a player they bought for £45m last summer. City fans won't shed many tears. Reijnders is far from the first Premier League player to accept Saudi Arabian riches, and he won't be the last.
But there is something jarring and a little bleak about the road from AC Milan's marauding midfielder to Al Qadsiah's flagship signing in little over a year.
Myles Lewis-Skelly likely to stay at Arsenal
A deal for Myles Lewis-Skelly to Chelsea is considered highly unlikely.
Chelsea are generally happy with their squad, and will only now move in the event of "reactions" to the market.
There is still some puzzlement within Arsenal as to how reports of the 19-year-old being offered around has got out. Lewis-Skelly's camp have not been in touch.
There is long-standing interest from Manchester United but the Old Trafford hierarchy do not have the finances right now to even test Arsenal's willingness to keep their teenage star.
Maresca reveals favourite to be new Man City captain after ruling out Haaland
Ruben Dias is in pole position to become Manchester City's next captain - because Erling Haaland scores so many goals.
New manager Enzo Maresca is yet to pick the next skipper, after Bernardo Silva left to join Real Madrid, but for now defender Dias and striker Haaland are the only two of the previous leadership group left in contention.
But Maresca likes to call his captain over to the touchline to make tactical changes after his side scores, which counts against Haaland, who got 38 goals last season and has 162 in four years with City.
That points to Dias leading the team, with Maresca saying: "Because if he scores he can't celebrate, yes.
"Ruben has shown during his time at this club how he is as a player, in terms of leadership. It's important for the captain and the leader to know that the reason they are captain is because I expect more from them. It's not because I give them more freedom or advantage. It's the opposite, the leadership group and captains have to show more and give more than the others."
Barcelona 'spinning plates' in the transfer market
Barcelona, in typical fashion, are attempting to spin a few plates at once this transfer window, writes Miguel Delaney in his Inside Football newsletter.
Having sold Ferran Torres to Paris Saint-Germain, Barcelona want to sign Rodri and also try and get the right striker in.
With Atletico Madrid currently intent on keeping Julian Alvarez, however, Barca have started to look at Internazionale's Lautaro Martinez in addition to Victor Osimhen.
Enzo Fernandez set to stay at Chelsea as deadline passes
Enzo Fernandez is set to stay at Chelsea after the club's 5pm Friday deadline passed without any acceptable bids being received.
The club laid down terms on Thursday that they expected either to receive a written bid matching their £120m valuation of the player or they would consider the matter of his future closed, and would not entertain any subsequent offers.
It is understood that the verbal terms and conditions that were made available to Fernandez's representatives for potential suitors at end of May are now off the table, and the club expects him to stay.
Manchester City are the last remaining club with a known interest in signing the World Cup winner, after Real Madrid publicly stated in July that they would not be pursuing Fernandez.
The 25-year-old worked with City boss Enzo Maresca during their 18 months together at Stamford Bridge and the Italian is known to admire the player.
It was thought that, with a £52m deal having been agreed to sell Tijjani Reijnders to Saudi Pro-League outfit Al-Qadsiah, funds would be freed up for City to take Fernandez to the Etihad Stadium as a like-for-like replacement for Rodri, who looks set to join Barcelona.
However, unless Chelsea can be persuaded into a U-turn and be brought to the negotiating table, Fernandez will still be at Stamford Bridge when the transfer window closes on 1 September.
ICYMI: Arsenal 'leading race' to sign Brighton's Jack Hinshelwood
Arsenal are in contention to sign Brighton midfielder Jack Hinshelwood.
That's according to The Sun, who reported earlier that Mikel Arteta is a fan of the 21-year-old. Hinshelwood can play across the midfield as well as at full-back. He scored four goals in 27 Premier League appearances last season.
Brighton would value their academy graduate at around £43m, potentially up to £50m in add-ons.
Meanwhile, Gabriel Martinelli has turned down the chance to join Galatasaray after the Turkish club explored a bid for the Arsenal winger.
It is known that Arsenal want to upgrade their attack this summer and Martinelli was reportedly part of talks for striker Victor Osimhen.