Firefighters work to tackle the blaze that tore through homes in the West Midlands, where a child and three firefighters were taken to hospital.
On the hottest day of the year, with temperatures soaring to 38.1C in Kew Gardens, more than 100 firefighters were tackling huge fires in the Stourbridge and Stratford-upon-Avon areas.
At Stourbridge golf course, an "extensive grass fire" spread across roads in places with people urged to stay indoors.
West Midlands Fire Service said that multiple houses caught fire and people were evacuated from their homes. The organisation said a child and three firefighters were taken to hospital.
Chief fire officer Simon Tuhill of West Midlands Fire Service has warned the emergency service presence in Stourbridge "will likely run into days" and told people to "stay away" from the area.
Councillor Andrew Tromans, who represents Wollaston and Stourbridge Town on Dudley Borough Council, described the scene of the fire in Stourbridge as "apocalyptic".
The Met Office has issued an amber extreme heat warning for much of England, covering parts of the south and east, as well as swathes of the Midlands.
Residents told to 'stay away' from area where homes have been burnt
Chief fire officer Simon Tuhill of West Midlands Fire Service has told residents to "stay away" after a huge fire burnt through homes in Stourbridge.
He said in a press conference: "We understand the impact that will have on the residents and the local community. We want to reassure everyone we will do everything we can to minimise that impact and, of course, get people back into their homes.
"However, it is the case that emergency service presence here will likely run into days and that means unfortunately asking people to stay away for that period."
Residents said they could see the flames from their bedroom
A woman who was evacuated from her home in Stourbridge said she could "see the flames from our bedroom window".
Jane Baxter told BBC Radio 4's Today Programme that "the smell is horrendous at the moment, it's really a choking smell in the air".
Ms Baxter, whose house backs directly onto the golf course where some of the worst damage was seen, said: "The police knocked our door and said that everyone had to be evacuated quickly because they thought the fire was changing directions, and they didn't know which direction it was going in.
"So, it was literally grab what you need and get out.
"And within about four or five minutes, the police knocked the door again and said: 'You really have got to get out now'.
"So, get out we did with the cat and away to go to our son's house."
Ms Baxter added: "Just literally 200 yards away from us, we could see the flames from our bedroom window.
"They were well above the rooftops of all the houses that had been evacuated, so you could just see the extent of it.
"It was spreading so fast and going in quite a few different directions across the fields."
Fire service says 11 major incidents declared across UK
The chairman of the National Fire Chiefs Council said the fire service is "under significant pressure" with 11 major incidents declared across the UK.
Phil Garrigan told BBC Radio 4's Today Programme: "It's not just the Stourbridge incident that we've dealt with over the last 24 hours.
"We've had 11 major incidents declared across the UK - Stourbridge particularly, but Sandwell, Pershore, Stoke-on-Trent. We've got incidents still raging in Hampshire, in South Wales.
"It's been a particularly difficult, busy period for the fire and rescue service, where we've been under significant pressure.
"Firefighters have been on the front line of climate change for a number of years. They're doing their absolute best to protect communities and properties."
Asked whether people were being encouraged on social media to start fires, Mr Garrigan said: "If people are encouraged to, and when people take those kind of directions and start fires, and those fires have an impact that they've had in West Midlands - then the individuals who have caused those fires will find themselves behind bars.
"I would be certainly discouraging them from taking any action and following any direction from anyone online, or anyone else for that matter."
Councillor describes 'apocalyptic' scenes
Councillor Andrew Tromans, who represents Wollaston and Stourbridge Town on Dudley Borough Council, described the scene of the fire in Stourbridge as "apocalyptic".
In a statement on Facebook, he said: "The apocalyptic scenes in Norton and across Stourbridge are sadly just a taste of what is to come if we don't act.
"Please do all you can to support the emergency services whilst they do their vital work.
"It is my view, and it has been for a while, that Dudley Councillors must have an emergency meeting about we protect our borough from the impacts of climate change.
"I want to see all parties get behind this."
How areas across the Midlands have been hit by wildfires
Areas across the West Midlands have been hit by the affects of wildfire.
- In Worcestershire, Hereford & Worcester Fire and Rescue Service said a number of homes had been damaged and 30 properties were evacuated in Pershore following a large fire on Lancelott Court. The fire service said one person was treated for smoke inhalation following the incident at about 4.30pm, and about 200 homes in the area were left without power.
- In Stoke-on-Trent in Staffordshire, another blaze hit "a small number of properties and gardens" in the Goldenhill area of the city.
- Severn Trent Water warned of disruption to water supply across the West Midlands as a result of the wildfires.
- The company said customers in Kidsgrove, near Stoke-on-Trent, may experience lower pressure and discoloured water because firefighters needed to use hydrants.
- In Warwickshire, the county's fire and rescue service said it was responding to a "large fire" in Salford Priors, Stratford-upon-Avon, which has been declared a major incident.
- Wildfires forced the closure of the M6 northbound between junctions five and six - causing more than two hours of delays.
West Midlands fire crews are 'making progress'
Fire crews are making progress tackling huge blazes in the West Midlands that led to thousands of 999 calls and caused "extensive" devastation, a fire chief said.
Chief fire officer Simon Tuhill, of West Midlands Fire Service, said one huge blaze in Stourbridge, which forced some people to flee after it started tearing through homes, was "one of the most significant" incidents the region's fire service has ever dealt with.
An update from West Midlands Fire Service on Friday morning said crews were "making progress" and "tactically working across several different areas of the site".
Watch: Stourbridge residents scramble with buckets to douse fire hotspots
ICYMI: Burnham thanks emergency services over 'awful' fires
Andy Burnham said he was in touch with local leaders in the West Midlands as firefighters continue to bring several wildfires in the region under control.
He said in a statement: "Awful to see homes and communities hit by fires across the country tonight as the heatwave continues.
"My thoughts are with everyone affected, particularly those who have been injured or forced from their homes, and with the firefighters who have been taken to hospital.
"I'm in touch with local leaders (including West Midlands Mayor Richard Parker) and will be speaking to emergency services on the ground as they continue their response.
"Our firefighters are working in incredibly difficult conditions and putting themselves at risk to keep others safe. A huge thank you to them and everyone supporting the effort tonight.
"Please stay safe and follow their advice."