Cole Palmer and Trent Alexander-Arnold have been recalled to the England squad by Thomas Tuchel for the nation's first internationals since the World Cup.
The pair were notable omissions from the 26-man World Cup squad that travelled to the United States in the summer. Palmer was snubbed by Tuchel after an injury-hampered 2025/26 resulted in a downturn in performance, while former Liverpool player Alexander-Arnold - who has played just once under Tuchel - was overlooked as a result of perceived defensive frailties.
However, the Chelsea star has got the new campaign off to a flyer under new Blues boss Xabi Alonso, scoring four goals and notching two assists across six games as part of a dynamite front three alongside Morgan Rogers and Joao Pedro.
His return to form has been rewarded with a return to the Three Lions setup, joining the creative group of Rogers, Jude Bellingham and Eberechi Eze in what is England's most stacked position. However, there is no place for Nottingham Forest captain Morgan Gibbs-White despite a brilliant start to the season.
Phil Foden was the other big name to miss out on World Cup selection, though his stuttered start to the new season - most recently being sent off in the Manchester derby - means his wait for a recall goes on. The Manchester City midfielder remains without a goal in 2026.
The other side of Manchester has fared better, with Kobbie Mainoo retained despite Manchester United's dismal early-season run, while Marcus Rashford has been named as a winger option. Harry Maguire, who was outspoken about his disappointment of not being selected for the World Cup, remains out in the cold.
Mainoo was the only player included in the World Cup squad not to play a minute of football in the summer, with injury ruling him out of his best opportunity in the third-place play-off against France.
Bournemouth midfielder Alex Scott and 18-year-old Liverpool winger Rio Ngumoha get their first senior call-up after both were included in the support group that travelled to the United States to help England during their World Cup warm-up.
Everton's Jarrad Branthwaite, Arsenal's Myles Lewis-Skelly, Newcastle left-back Lewis Hall and Leeds striker Dominic Calvert-Lewin have all also been named.
In total Tuchel has not called up nine players from the initial World Cup squad, with Noni Madueke and the Saudi-based pair of Ivan Toney, and Ollie Watkins dropped. Reece James has not been named after suffering an injury and missing Chelsea training this week, while John Stones, Dean Henderson, Dan Burn, Jordan Henderson and former Tottenham full-back Djed Spence - who has yet to play for new club Inter Milan as he rebuilds his fitness - are all also unavailable for selection due to injury.
England squad in full for September and October internationals
Goalkeepers: Jordan Pickford, James Trafford, Jason Steele
Defenders: Trent Alexander-Arnold, Tino Livramento, Jarrad Branthwaite, Trevoh Chalobah, Marc Guehi, Ezri Konsa, Jarell Quansah, Lewis Hall, Nico O'Reilly
Midfielders: Elliot Anderson, Jude Bellingham, Myles Lewis-Skelly, Kobbie Mainoo, Cole Palmer, Declan Rice, Alex Scott
Forwards: Harry Kane, Dominic Calvert-Lewin, Eberechi Eze, Anthony Gordon, Rio Ngumoha, Marcus Rashford, Morgan Rogers, Bukayo Saka
Who do England face in the international break?
England head into an extended three-week international break across the end of September and beginning of October, during which they will play their first four matches of the new Nations League campaign.
The Three Lions return to action against world champions Spain on Saturday 26 September, their first match at Wembley since enduring World Cup heartbreak at the hands of Argentina in the semi-finals.
They then face trips to Czech Republic on Tuesday 29 September and Croatia four days later, before welcoming Czech Republic to Wembley in the reverse fixture on Tuesday 6 October.