Monty Don is stepping down from Gardeners' World after more than 20 years on the show.
The BBC announced the news in a statement on Tuesday.
The broadcaster said that Don, as head gardener for the show, had "inspired and guided millions" since joining the programme in 2003. Since 2011, he had welcomed audiences into his own garden, Longmeadow in Herefordshire, every week.
Don said: "I have decided that the current series of Gardeners' World is to be my last. I began hosting the programme 23 years ago, first at Berryfields and for the past 16 years here in my own garden, Longmeadow.
"Throughout that time - and around 700 programmes - I have had the privilege of sharing my own abiding passion for gardens and gardening with an equally passionate, and often equally knowledgeable audience.
"That connection with millions, not just in Britain but across the world, who share a love of gardens, plants and the natural world is something I have always treasured and which I increasingly believe to be at the heart of a life well lived."
Don said that making a programme with the "superlative" BBC team had been a deeply rewarding experience, but "now is the right time for a change".
He said he was looking forward to working with, and for, the BBC on other projects, as well as "following new avenues".
He said: "There are more books to write, more programmes to make.
"And of course, I will still be gardening, dog by side, here at Longmeadow."
The BBC's chief content officer Kate Phillips said she was "very sad" to see Don leave the show.
"Monty is utterly unique, a wonderfully engaging broadcaster with a soothing, calm presence who has inspired so many with his passion for gardening," she said.
"We are a nation full of budding gardeners, and his tips and advice have been invaluable to viewers for more than 20 years and have certainly helped me increase my knowledge as well as my plant survival rate!"
Throughout his time on the show, Don has been open about his struggles with his mental health, including depression, anxiety, and seasonal affective disorder (SAD).
He has also spoken about the therapeutic nature of gardening, saying that being outside and working with soil can support recovery.
Phillips said she wanted to personally thank Don for his "honesty and kindness" around those issues, and for speaking about the power of the natural world to improve mental health.
Sharon Fisher, BBC Studios series editor for Gardeners' World, said that Don's contribution to the show had been "extraordinary".
"Through his warmth, wisdom and deep love of gardening, he has inspired millions to discover the pleasure and purpose that getting your hands into the soil can bring," she said.
"I have seen first-hand the care, integrity and generosity he brings to everything he does. His departure marks the end of a remarkable chapter in the programme's history.
"All of us on the Gardeners' World team, will miss him enormously, but we celebrate everything he has given to the programme, the gardening community and the audience who have welcomed him into their homes every week for over two decades."
Audiences will be be able to see Don broadcast from Longmeadow until later this year.