Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
The UK has recorded its joint-fourth warmest September ever, according to provisional figures from the Met Office.
The maximum temperature was as high as 28.1C on 29 September, the forecaster said, level with September figures from 1949 and 2016.
This was around 2C cooler than the joint-warmest Septembers on record, recorded in 2006 and 2023.
Met Office climate information Scientist Mike Kendon said: "Persistent warmth has been the theme of recent months and September is no different. September 2026 was the joint-fourth warmest September on record in the series for the UK, with high pressure particularly prevalent in southern areas later in the month.
"While the month itself was unexceptional overall, when putting it into the context of the warm year we've had so far, this fits with the general pattern that we're seeing of more frequent above average temperatures in the UK as our climate continues to change."
Temperature levels were not consistent across the UK, the data showed, with it being the joint-sixth warmest September in Wales, third warmest in England, and fourth warmest in Northern Ireland.
There was near-average rainfall for the month, but England remained "relatively dry" compared to other nations, the Met Office said.
This follows the back-to-back heatwaves experienced across June to August this year, which put over 70 per cent of the UK into official drought conditions.
Environment Agency chief executive, Philip Duffy, said: "September's rainfall has been welcome, but a few weeks of unsettled weather is nowhere near enough to reverse the water deficits caused by a dry spring and record hot summer.
"Drought is only over when groundwater, rivers, and reservoirs are back to normal levels - and that will take months of significant and sustained wet weather.
"In the meantime, the situation remains serious, with drought-hit areas of England again seeing the least amount of rain over the month. Water supplies are limited and several reservoirs are concerningly low. We still need everyone to use a little less water to speed up the drought recovery and save more for our local rivers, farmers, and wildlife."
Despite a warmer start to autumn, forecasters have said that cooler temperatures and unsettled conditions could sweep the UK towards the end of the year due to the El Niño weather phenomenon.
Experts have said wet and stormy conditions in autumn could develop into an icy winter as the "super El Niño" becomes the strongest in history.
El Niño is a naturally occurring climate phenomenon that develops in the tropical Pacific Ocean. It takes place when sea-surface temperatures across the central and eastern Pacific become significantly warmer than average, altering atmospheric circulation patterns and influencing weather around the globe.
Met Office five-day weather forecast
Thursday
Sunny spells and largely dry conditions for most. A few showers mainly in the West, with blustery winds in the North West. Cloud and showery rain reach Northern Ireland later. Cooler than Wednesday, with temperatures closer to average.
Dry with clear spells in the South and South East, chilly in rural areas with isolated mist or fog. Windy elsewhere with showers, some heavy and persistent, especially across south-west Scotland.
Friday
Bands of heavy showers, with a risk of hail and thunder, move north-east across many areas. Further showers follow in the North West, while south-east England stays largely dry and warm.
Saturday to Monday
Unsettled at times, with rain affecting mostly northern areas as well as England and Wales. Brighter spells develop elsewhere. Generally warmer in the south, with temperatures nearer average further north.