Andy Burnham is hoping to find "common ground" with Donald Trump at their first face-to-face meeting on Tuesday in New York.
The prime minister told reporters: "We've found a connection. So, I will go with where I feel it's right, to meet him where he is at, and search for that common ground, which I'm sure we'll find."
Mr Burnham also insisted he personally trusts Donald Trump, ahead of their first meeting, telling reporters: "When you come into this job, you realise how deep this relationship is.
"We trust our allies. Of course, we do."
He and the US president will hold talks on Tuesday in the margins of the United Nations General Assembly meeting, which will see discussions on wars in Ukraine and the Middle East and the rapid development of AI.
The two leaders have held phone calls but this will be their first in-person meeting.
He is also set to tell the UN that the UK is not "on the slide" and attempt to draw a line under 10 years of post-Brexit turbulence as he meets world leaders.
It comes as Mr Burnham confirmed Britain will provide military support to Saudi Arabia to counter attacks by Iran-backed Houthis and protect energy supplies.
Opinion: Our people-pleasing PM faces his ultimate challenge in Donald Trump
The least of Andy Burnham's worries as he prepares for the UN General Assembly in New York, and his first meeting with Donald Trump, is what he has said about the US president in the past.
Before he became prime minister, Mr Burnham was certainly critical of the president, taking the view in 2021 for example that "any politician who gave Trump the time of day should be ashamed right now".
Yet it is a curious feature of Mr Trump's generally vengeful personality that he doesn't allow things said in the past to get in the way of business. After all, and despite some mildly disobliging remarks made in the past, Sir Keir Starmer managed to forge a surprisingly warm relationship with his counterpart, at least in the earlier phase of his premiership. Until the Iran war and disagreements about "civilisational erasure" in Europe soured the bromance, Sir Keir, ably assisted by Buckingham Palace, enjoyed a brief career as world champion "Trump whisperer". That ended with the president dismissing Sir Keir as "no Winston Churchill".
Read our full editorial here:
What can we expect from today?
It is currently just after 6am in New York, with Andy Burnham set for a busy day ahead meeting world leaders at the United Nations.
At around 12.20pm UK time, he will meet with Josh Turner, a Manchester-born entrepreneur, before attending a roundtable with business and investment leaders.
At 4.45pm, he is due to hold a meeting with Donald Trump before both of them make opening statements, followed by bilateral meetings with Ursula von der Leyen, Volodymyr Zelensky and Turkey's Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
At 9:45pm, he is set to attend a Middle East event with Emmanuel Macron and Canada's Mark Carney, before addressing the UN General Assembly at 12:30am.
We'll be bringing you all the latest.
Government borrowing hits second-highest August on record in setback for Healey
UK Government borrowing rose in August to the second-highest level for the month on record, coming in above forecasts and piling pressure on Chancellor John Healey ahead of his first autumn Budget, figures show.
Public sector net borrowing rose to £18.3 billion in August, which was £3.5 billion more than what official Government forecasters had been expecting, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said.
The figure was £2.9 billion, or 19 per cent, more than the same month last year and marked the second-highest August borrowing on record, behind that of 2020.
Public sector net borrowing shows the difference between what the Government spends on the public sector and what it makes from taxes and other income.
The ONS said the jump was driven by spending increasing more than the Government was generating from taxes and other receipts.
This partly reflected inflation-related costs and spending on the state pension and other benefits.
Rising debt interest costs are set to create challenges for Mr Healey whose fiscal headroom remains stretched, a month away from him delivering his first autumn Budget statement in October.
Burnham to find 'common ground' with Donald Trump
Andy Burnham has said he is expecting to find "common ground" with Donald Trump during their first in-person meeting.
Since entering No10, the prime minister and the US president have spoken twice on the phone.
He told reporters: "We've found a connection. So, I will go with where I feel it's right, to meet him where he is at, and search for that common ground, which I'm sure we'll find.
He added: "I'm looking forward to it."
UK borders are secure, minister says after migrant boat reaches coast undetected
The UK's borders are secure, a minister has insisted after a migrant boat reached the Kent coast without being intercepted.
Five people were detained and passed to Border Security Command after the dinghy made it to shore at Folkestone on Monday - the first undetected landing for a year.
Defence minister Luke Pollard dismissed suggestions the Government had lost control of the border.
"Our borders are secure, but we want to make them stronger," he told LBC Radio on Tuesday.
Asked how the boat slipped through, Mr Pollard said a Home Office investigation was under way to determine what had happened, without going into detail.
He also said: "We're aware that the boat that got through, everyone has been detained on it."
The thousands of migrants crossing the Channel are usually brought to shore by Border Security Command or RNLI boats.
No small boat arrivals to the UK coast without an escort have been officially recorded since 6 September 2025.
Support for Reform UK falls to lowest level since 2024, poll shows
A recent poll has shown support for Reform UK has fallen to its lowest level since the 2024 general election.
The YouGov poll for Sky News and The Times has put the party in joint second place with the Conservatives, suggesting Kemi Badenoch's popularity is improving while Nigel Farage's appeal is waning.
The voting intention tracker places Labour at 23 per cent, with Reform UK and the Tories at 21 per cent each.
Prime minister seeks to avoid 'collateral damage' to UK industry from EU scheme
Andy Burnham will urge Brussels' top official Ursula von der Leyen not to use protectionist measures to freeze UK firms out of European contracts.
The prime minister will meet the European Commission president in the margins of the United Nations General Assembly on Tuesday with a message that "we are not your enemy".
He will warn that UK industry risks becoming "collateral damage" as a result of the EU's scheme to protect its manufacturing businesses from being undercut by competition from China.
The so-called "Made in Europe" scheme - formally known as the Industrial Accelerator Act - could damage firms which are closely linked to supply chains across the continent.
The EU's proposals intend to focus public contracts and subsidies for clean technologies such as electric vehicles and green energy on manufacturers based within the bloc.
The move could potentially hit some British manufacturers and firms supplying components to companies based in the EU.
Mr Burnham said he would be raising the concerns directly with Ms Von der Leyen in New York.
"We do have concerns about Made in Europe, which is something that could affect British industry and British supply chains," he said.
"I will meet the President of the European Commission... and I will, in a constructive spirit, put on the table some of our concerns towards those things."
Analysis: A new stance on Brexit could help Burnham win the next election - but he will have to fight for it
Ask any UK opposition party leader and they'll tell you that they can see very few differences between Sir Keir Starmer and the man who replaced him.
From the economy to foreign policy, Andy Burnham has given very little away when it comes to his agenda for his time in office and, on many issues, has said he will continue work started by Sir Keir.
But as he took questions from journalists on his plane to New York, it took just a few minutes for Mr Burnham to offer up a key divergence from his predecessor when it comes to Britain's relationship with Europe.
In response to a direct question from The Independent, he did not rule out putting a pledge to rejoin the EU in Labour's next election manifesto - a stance very different to that of Starmer's government.
Read the analysis from our Whitehall editor Kate Devlin here:
Rejoining the EU could be in Labour's next manifesto, Burnham suggests
Andy Burnham appeared to leave the door open to reversing Brexit as he failed to rule out putting a pledge to rejoin the EU in Labour's next manifesto.
It comes hours before the prime minister will tell world leaders in his speech to the United Nations General Assembly in New York that Britain is entering a new era. He said he would point to last decade "with Brexit and turbulence - and say we're moving beyond that".
Asked directly by The Independent if he could rule out a promise to rejoin the bloc in his party's manifesto, Mr Burnham said it was a question "for another day".
Read the full article here:
Defence minister says Saudi Arabia support will be for 'defensive actions'
British military aid to Saudi Arabia will conform with international law, a defence minister has said.
Luke Pollard told Sky News: "They'll be for defensive actions, where all actions will be in compliance with international humanitarian law, because UK military assets are not used if there's any doubt around IHL compliance.
"And that is not only supporting our friends in Saudi Arabia being able to defend themselves against the attacks the Houthis have made on them, but it's also about supporting our own national security and the flow of navigation, flow of traffic through the Bab al-Mandab Strait."
Asked if it was also the morally right thing to do, Mr Pollard said: "In dangerous times, good friends stand together, and there's a morality of being true to our allies.
"Saudi Arabia have requested air-to-air refuelling. After discussion, we've agreed to that request.
"That is a key part of being able to project not just our values, but also our values around national security, but also about supporting allies in these difficult times."