Gianni Infantino has officially scrapped his plan to sell-off stakes in the World Cup but Uefa has come out and declared it has lost confidence in his Fifa presidency after the controversial proposals.
"The current Fifa leadership has not only lost Uefa's confidence but also that of many other members of the football family," said Uefa in a statement on Saturday morning and claimed "the shabby, back room, opaque deal he hatched and tried to force through were anything but transparent" in a damning missive.
Infantino is now is under mounting pressure from football federations as well as from within Fifa, with his long-term adviser Carlos Cordeiro choosing to quit in protest over Infantino's initial proposals, while Fifa's chief operating officer has said that Infantino "deceived" staff over his plans. Questions are now arising as to whether his presidency remains tenable.
Donald Trump meanwhile told reporters on Friday that he had not spoken to Infantino about the plans despite their close relationship and the fact that Josh Kushner, the brother of Trump's son-in-law Jared Kushner, was expected to lead the proposed investor group.
Follow all the latest news below:
Qatar Football Association welcome Fifa's decision - and backs Infantino
The president of the Qatar Football Association, Sheikh Hama bin Khalifa bin Ahmed Al Thani, has released a statement on Fifa scrapping their plans for private investors.
It reads: "We welcome FIFA President Gianni Infantino's decision to withdraw the FIFA Forward Enterprise proposal in the interest of the global football community.
"While the proposal had merit, we applaud the wisdom behind prioritising unity among Member Associations.
"The Qatar Football Association fully supports President Infantino's efforts to continue growing and strengthening the game globally."
ANALYSIS: Gianni Infantino's demise isn't enough - Fifa must fundamentally change
As football figures eagerly shared Gianni Infantino's humiliating climbdown, many willingly still up well into the early hours of Saturday, a resolve was only hardened.
The sentiment was very much that step one was achieved. Now for step two: "He's still got to go."
But "step three" should be more important than one or two: that there is proper accountability and an acknowledgement that this is ultimately about much more than one man and one week.
Read Miguel Delaney's full analysis of the mess at Fifa that has played out over the past week:
Trust in Infantino 'badly shaken' says Uefa vice president
Uefa vice president Laura McAllister has hit out at Gianni Infantino for his World Cup sell-off plan and says trust in the Fifa boss has been "badly shaken".
Speaking on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, McAllister said: "It's not for me to speak for for Uefa at this moment in time, but I think trust in the president of Fifa has been badly shaken this week, without a doubt, and I think quite rightly, people will ask questions about whether he is the leader to take us forward as a global football organisation.
"Because we have to stick to the ethical principles of sustainability, fair play, and accessibility to football that really motivate us all. So I think those are the questions that all of us involved in football will be asking now."
Asked if she could envision circumstances in which Uefa might find a challenger to him to stand against him, she said: "I think all of the confederations would be considering options now for sure, and we'll certainly be doing that in Uefa.
"But you know, it's a democratic election. If people want to stand, they will, and there will be moves, I'm sure, to encourage people to stand. But I think it's early days yet."
She later added: "Interestingly, I don't think the sport of football is damaged by what's happened this week. I think Fifa as an organisation, is, and I think the president is."
'Infantino out' - but who could challenge for Fifa presidency?
Infantino's future as Fifa president is up in the air, with many demanding that he resign the role. But who might actually be able to replace him?
Will Castle has examined the contenders:
Infantino's senior adviser quits in protest at World Cup plan
Gianni Infantino's senior adviser Carlos Cordeiro quit on Friday, only adding to the pressure on the Fifa president.
Cordeiro, in announcing his departure, described the initiative to create Fifa Forward Enterprise as a "bad deal for football".
He elaborated in a statement: "Football has been central to my life and after more than 35 years in banking, I understand both the value of this asset and the consequences of giving part of it away. That is why this proposal should be rejected."
Gianni Infantino's statement in full
Here's Gianni Infantino's full statement backing down from his World Cup sell-off plan:
"The Fifa Forward Enterprise project was intended to provide a basis for further strengthening our Fifa Member Associations and our sport worldwide, especially in those countries where support is most needed. And more so, as we said from the outset, to do this only if a majority of the Fifa Member Associations were in support and always subject to a consultation process with them, the FIFA Council, the Confederations and wider stakeholders.
"Having listened carefully to all the views, it has become clear that the project has created divisions of a nature that, regardless of the level of support, are no longer in the interest of the objective set out in the first place.
"Our purpose has always been - and will always be - to unite and improve. As a result, this proposal will not proceed.
"Moving forward, my intent is to bring all interested parties back together in the coming days and weeks in the spirit of shared interest in our game, and with the objective to continue growing football everywhere, particularly in those countries that mostly need our support."
Qatar Football Association welcome Fifa's decision - and backs Infantino
The president of the Qatar Football Association, Sheikh Hama bin Khalifa bin Ahmed Al Thani, has released a statement on Fifa scrapping their plans for private investors.
It reads: "We welcome FIFA President Gianni Infantino's decision to withdraw the FIFA Forward Enterprise proposal in the interest of the global football community.
"While the proposal had merit, we applaud the wisdom behind prioritising unity among Member Associations.
"The Qatar Football Association fully supports President Infantino's efforts to continue growing and strengthening the game globally."
Trump denies knowing about Infantino's sell-off plans
US President Donald Trump has denied discussing FIFA's proposals to offer stakes to external investors with Gianni Infantino.
Speaking to reporters at Camp David, Mr Trump addressed the matter after Fufa announced earlier this week its intention to create a $20bn subsidiary to run the World Cup and its other events, although this plan has since collapsed.
This new subsidiary would have offered up to 20 per cent of its shares to outside investors and the proposed investor group was set to be led by a vehicle founded by Joshua Kushner, brother of President Trump's son-in-law, Jared Kushner.
The denial comes amid a close relationship between Mr Trump and Fifa president Mr Infantino, which developed before and during the World Cup this summer.
Concacaf statement adds to pressure on Infantino
Concacaf has now released a statement and it has only added to the pressure on Infantino.
"The events of recent days have exposed something that cannot now be set aside: the future of the Fifa World Cup, the greatest asset in world football, was advanced outside every established governance framework, without transparency, consultation or due process," said the statement.
"A proposal of this magnitude does not reach that stage by accident. It is a symptom of leadership that has stopped putting football first. This recent unilateral and egregious act of poor governance and leadership follows a pattern of missteps and similar behaviour. A full review of this leadership must now take place.
"When people entrusted with protecting the game conclude they can no longer do so from within, the football family is entitled to ask how such a proposal was allowed to proceed, and who bears responsibility for it.
"We are all simple custodians, serving a game that belongs to us all."
Gianni Infantino's demise isn't enough - Fifa must fundamentally change
As football figures eagerly shared Gianni Infantino's humiliating climbdown, many willingly still up well into the early hours of Saturday, a resolve was only hardened.
The sentiment was very much that step one was achieved. Now for step two: "He's still got to go."
But "step three" should be more important than one or two: that there is proper accountability and an acknowledgement that this is ultimately about much more than one man and one week.
Read Miguel Delaney's full analysis of the mess at Fifa that has played out over the past week: