At least eight people died and 7,000 travellers were left stranded at one of Tokyo's international airports after record rainfall flooded roads, rail lines and homes east of the Japanese capital.
Chiba, a prefecture bordering Tokyo, saw 367mm of rain in 24 hours in some areas, surpassing the record of 309mm set in October 2013.
Sakura received 97mm of rain, also a record, during one of the busiest holiday weeks of the year in Japan.
The Japan Meteorological Agency issued, for the first time, its highest level of heavy rainfall warning for more than a dozen municipalities in the prefecture on Thursday but downgraded it on Friday as the rain eased, although it forecast more later in the day.
"For rivers where the risk of flooding is already high, please take action to protect your lives in any way possible," Kazuhito Shimamoto, from the land ministry, advised the public. "There are also rivers where the risk of flooding is expected to increase further, so please check the evacuation advisories issued by your local municipalities and evacuate early."
Takuya Hosomi, a forecaster at the weather agency, told a televised emergency news conference that Chiba recorded unprecedented levels of rainfall.
"This case was an extremely unusual situation, even by Japan's historical weather standards," Chiba's governor, Toshihito Kumagai, told reporters on Friday.
"I have responded to many disasters in the past, but I have never experienced a case like this."
A man was found floating down a flooded road in Ichikawa and a 66-year-old woman was killed after her car was trapped in floodwaters in Sakura city.
Another person was pulled from a flooded car in Kashiwa and was presumed dead.
One person remains missing. Soldiers have been sent to the area to help with the disaster response.
Japanese prime minister Sanae Takaichi said disasters caused by heavy rain had become "increasingly frequent" in recent years.
She said authorities would "remain vigilant" to "protect the lives and livelihoods of the people".
"I offer my deepest condolences to those who have passed away, and on behalf of all, I humbly extend my sympathies to their bereaved families," she added.
Footage from public broadcaster NHK showed water spurting violently from what appeared to be a maintenance hole and exceeding the height of a nearby five-storey building in Chiba's central ward.
More than 80 homes were flooded and nearly 230,000 residents across the prefecture were advised to leave for safety, according to Chiba officials.
Some 23,000 households, the vast majority in Chiba prefecture, were still without power on Friday morning, according to utility provider Tokyo Electric Power, down from 68,000 earlier.
Around 7,000 people spent the night at the Narita international airport, queueing for blankets, water and snacks from staff before bedding down across the terminal, footage broadcast by NHK showed.
"We are never going to forget this trip," an American traveller stranded there with his family told the broadcaster.
The Ground Self Defence Force sent buses to collect some 4,000 people who had spent the night at the Soga station on the line serving the Tokyo Disney Resort, which reported no damage.
Hundreds more sheltered overnight at the Chiba prefectural government building, sleeping under foil blankets.
Some rail services connecting Narita to Tokyo had resumed by Friday morning, easing the congestion at the airport, though several lines remained suspended.
Major roads in Chiba were closed, including routes between Narita and central Tokyo, pushing drivers onto alternative routes, the highway operator NEXCO East said.
An airport spokesperson said all flights were scheduled to run normally on Friday.
Japan Airlines said some delays were possible but no cancellations were expected.
The flooding comes at the end of a fortnight of severe weather across Japan. A run of typhoons and extreme heat, which killed three lions at a Tokyo zoo and brought the first recorded "cruelly hot day", have left the country reeling.
Scientists say a warmer atmosphere holds more moisture, making the heaviest downpours heavier.