Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
If you ask me, there is no more damning artistic statement on Mark Zuckerberg than in the final scene of David Fincher's The Social Network. The Facebook CEO, having acquired all the power and status he could hope for, sits alone hitting refresh on a friend request to the girl who dumped him. It's a moment of poetic licence (Zuckerberg was already dating his now-wife, Priscilla Chan, at the time) that provides the punchline to today's tech autocracy at large. Charmless in life, these men have found a way to game the world and hoard social capital for themselves. They were after the cheat code for the popularity contest.
The Social Reckoning, Aaron Sorkin's quasi-sequel to Fincher's original, never attempts an equivalent scene with Zuckerberg, now played by Jeremy Strong. (Jesse Eisenberg, who declined to reprise his Oscar-nominated role, couldn't stomach how fans would come up and ask him to sign something with, as Zuckerberg writes on his business card, "I'm CEO, bitch".) Now in total control as director, too - having only written The Social Network - Sorkin has made a quintessential "Aaron Sorkin journalism film", a sibling to his didactic series The Newsroom. It strips out the basics of the Wall Street Journal's "The Facebook Files" series by Jeff Horwitz, alongside Zuckerberg's subsequent testimony to Congress, and repeats them to the audience without any real additional insight.
The film is enraging because the information it contains is enraging. Facebook rigged its algorithm to reward post reshares, knowing that the more outrageous the content the more likely it is to be disseminated. The platform's boost in engagement came at the cost of actively promoting extremist content. Horwitz (played here by The Bear's Jeremy Allen White) was able to acquire proof the company knew it was radicalising its own users via data-engineer-turned-whistleblower Frances Haugen (Anora Oscar-winner Mikey Madison).
Sorkin explains this with the pace and imagination of a PowerPoint presentation. While The Social Network and The Social Reckoning share a cinematographer in Jeff Cronenweth, they certainly don't share a look; the latter has a tendency to sweep the camera back and forth like it's worried the illusion of movement is the only thing preventing its audience from falling asleep.
Fincher's steady, unflinching gaze was preoccupied with Netflix's forthcoming The Further Mis-Adventures of Cliff Booth. Yet I'm not sure he alone is the missing piece. Sorkin's characters here feel half-formed. Horwitz and Haugen receive a quirk each: she wears fingerless gloves because her coeliac disease gives her cold hands, and to suggest she's self-protective; he loves old movies because he's an analogue guy against tech automation. Neither is written or performed to be particularly charismatic. Sorkin's comfort zone is the world of political blowhards; he lacks Fincher's skill or experience in how to make awkward people compelling to watch.
Strong perfectly replicates the CEO as an evil turtle who weaponises his perceived emotionlessness to conceal the cruelty he inflicts on others. But all he does in the film is repeat the man's own talking points - his constant string of denials - in a way that flattens his performance into a Saturday Night Live impersonation.
We flip back and forth between Horwitz and Haugen's investigation and Zuckerberg's rehearsal for his testimony (Bill Burr and Wunmi Mosaku play his advisors). It's all oddly insular. The world of Facebook itself feels out of reach. In his recreation of the January 6 attack on the United States Capitol, Sorkin pairs the mournful warbling of Alexandre Desplat's score with a fragmented, contextless montage of flags and stomped boots. Would it not have been more effective to have used any of the (endless) real-life footage shot that day and posted on, well, Facebook?
Sorkin seems reluctant to integrate much of the world outside his trio of players, but neither is he all that invested in what makes any of them tick. Surely the purpose of fiction over documentary is that it grants the artist the right to fill in the psychological blank spaces. The Facebook Files show Zuckerberg is driven by profit, but what else is in that head of his? We never see him alone. What happens when the "yes" men go home and he's left with his conscience? The Social Reckoning won't even hazard a guess.
Dir: Aaron Sorkin. Starring: Mikey Madison, Jeremy Allen White, Jeremy Strong, Bill Burr, Wunmi Mosaku, Betty Gilpin, Billy Magnussen. 15, 112 mins.
'The Social Reckoning' is in cinemas from 9 October