Spain won the World Cup for the second time in their history as they claimed a 1-0 extra-time victory over 10-man Argentina before ugly scenes on the pitch after full time marred the celebrations.
Ferran Torres' smashed finish in the 106th minute was enough for Spain to add to their 2010 triumph but Argentina - who offered little throughout the match - reacted badly after the final whistle, with players brawling, Leandro Paredes sent off after grabbing Eric Garcia by the throat and reports of punches being thrown.
Donald Trump then unsurprisingly inserted himself into things post-match as he lurked towards the edge of Spain's trophy lift to ensure he was in the photo, despite Gianni Infantino trying to usher him away, after presenting the Spanish players with medals and the trophy. However, the US president was audibly booed when he first walked on to the pitch with Infantino.
After a dire spectacle for 90 minutes, with neither side mustering any real chances, Enzo Fernandez stupidly got himself sent off just before the end of normal time when he crunched Pau Cubarsi on halfway and was deservedly shown a second yellow card, having earlier been booked for dissent.
Spain then finally made the breakthrough when Torres calmly hammered home at the start of the second half of extra time and it meant Lionel Messi was denied on surely his final World Cup appearance, with the aftermath further souring the occasion for the 39-year-old football icon.
Relive all the action from the World Cup final, below
Five reasons why the World Cup final was so dull
Finals usually are like this!
Sure, this was not the 2022 World Cup final between Argentina and France. But the reason that match should be remembered as the greatest football match of all time is because it took place within what is usually the suffocating constraints of the biggest sporting event on the planet. When the stakes and pressure are so high and the margins between immortality and defeat are so fine, it does not tend to result in a thriller. England's 6-4 win over France in the third-place match on Saturday night would never have played out like that if it was the final. An exciting World Cup as a whole does not guarantee a final of the same ilk. So, actually, this was a typical World Cup final, one to follow Germany 1-0 Argentina (after extra time, 2014), Spain 1-0 Netherlands (after extra time, 2010), Brazil 0-0 Italy (3-2 on pens, 1994).
Five reasons why the World Cup final was so dull
The weather
The 3pm ET kick-off time in New Jersey (8pm BST) was undoubtedly scheduled with the European TV market in mind as well as the local and South American audience. But starting in the middle of the afternoon and the hottest part of the day (27C / 80.6F) would not have helped the players, either. The New York New Jersey Stadium is a giant outdoor bowl exposed to the elements, unlike the semi-final venues in Atlanta's Mercedes Benz Stadium and the Dallas Stadium in Texas which feature giant retractable roofs and benefit from air conditioning.
Five reasons why the World Cup final was so dull
A ' bobbly, dry' pitch
Concerns were first raised about the state of the 'New York New Jersey Stadium' pitch weeks ago. Brazil star Vinicius Jr said following the 1-1 draw against Morocco that "because of the weather and the heat, the grass dries out quickly and the game ends up being very slow". Sound familiar? On ITV, Ian Wright led criticism of the World Cup final pitch following the goalless first half, calling the playing surface "ridiculous, poor, terrible" as well as "bobbly and dry" - hardly ideal conditions for slick attacking play and silky dribbling.
Five reasons why the World Cup final was so dull
All the delays
The final kicked off six minutes late following a bizarre speech from Tom Cruise, which wasn't great, but it sounds pretty inconsequential when compared to the 27-minute delay between the end of the first half and the start of the second. Organisers Fifa had assured both teams before the final that the half-time show was expected to take around 20 minutes, but the delay to the World Cup final was actually much longer, which meant Fifa went even further in breaking their own rules. The game's laws state half-time breaks should "not exceed 15 minutes".
Appearing on the BBC, and speaking for maybe everyone, former England captain Wayne Rooney said the half-time show was "crap" - but Spain actually had one of their better periods of the game after half-time, creating several chances and dangerous moments. Spain then hit another delay, however, with the second hydration break. We may have got used to the three-minute stoppages throughout this World Cup, but they don't help matches that desperately need some rhythm and flow.
Five reasons why the World Cup final was so dull
Style of the teams
Spain love the ball and seek to control the game through meticulous passing (but some people also find this "boring"). Argentina like fouls and gamesmanship, breaking up the game and doing whatever it takes to win until one of their stars - and it is usually the greatest of all time in Lionel Messi - makes the difference (but some people also find this "dirty").
Together, "boring" v "dirty"(to borrow a couple of phrases used elsewhere) is not a great combination. Add in that fact that both teams were playing their eighth match of an exhausting tournament, with Argentina looking particularly tired following several comebacks in the knockout stages.
So, it didn't help the final that Argentina resorted to even more fouls, leading to Enzo Fernandez's red card shortly before extra time. They failed to land a single shot before Ferran Torres fired Spain into the lead, having contributed very little to the spectacle until it was far too late.
Then, when Argentina finally arrived, their tournament ended in disgrace, with Leandro Paredes sent off following the final whistle after appearing to lash out at Spain's Eric Garcia and Gavi. And no, post-match scraps do not salvage a dismal final.
Shearer: 'The right team won'
"There is no doubt that the right team won," said Alan Shearer on BBC One.
"From start to finish Spain controlled possession, they were the ones looking to play football, create chances and get in behind. This is a result for football because of the way that they have played. Spain deserve it."
Joe Hart added: "Spain fully deserve it. They have been absolutely superb all tournament. They have dominated all game against a ridged, rugged Argentina. The best team has won this World Cup."
Argentina's World Cup final performance was a disgrace to Lionel Messi's legacy
Don't cry for them, Argentina. Some tears were shed by Lionel Messi, after an unsatisfactory end to one of the great World Cup careers. But his team-mates merit rather less sympathy. What had been a valiant, dramatic and compelling attempt to retain the World Cup ended with a lack of discipline, creativity and, above all, shots.
The historic feat, it transpired, was not becoming the first team since Brazil in 1962 to win consecutive World Cups, but in being officially the least attacking team ever in a final. Argentina had no shot of any kind in 90 minutes, an xG of 0.00 when it went to extra time. Spain had 20 shots before Argentina's first, in the 121st minute.
All this with a man who has been involved in more World Cup goals than anyone else, who many believe is the greatest footballer ever. A team with Messi should not be this dull, this focused on delaying and disrupting.
Richard Jolly reports from New York: