Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
Gypsy Rose Blanchard has spoken out about the death of her fiancé and the father of her child, Ken Urker. He died Thursday, on his 34th birthday.
Blanchard, 35, confirmed Urker's death in a Thursday night statement to TMZ, saying: "Ken was an amazing father and a man who was deeply loved."
She added that he "will forever be my soulmate and my red string, a connection that time, distance, and even death can never erase."
The Lafourche Parish Sheriff's Office confirmed in a statement shared with The Independent that police found Urker dead at his Louisiana home after receiving a call Thursday at 6:15 p.m. Investigators found him next to "a brown powdery substance," a syringe, handgun and two shot glasses.
"At this time, we are continuing the death investigation," a police spokesperson said. "To this point, we have discovered no signs of foul play."
Blanchard told People that Urker died from an apparent overdose. His cause of death has not yet been determined.
"I don't know if it was intentional or not," Blanchard told the outlet. "He was not in a good state of mind lately."
She went on to say that Urker was subjected to intense online harassment about their relationship.
"Ken endured an unimaginable level of public scrutiny and relentless cyberbullying across social media platforms, including TikTok and Reddit," she told People. "The cruelty directed toward him was something no human being should have to endure."
She added: "I believe the tremendous weight of that scrutiny and harassment had a profound impact on him, and I hope his passing serves as a reminder that there is a real person behind every screen, every headline, and every comment."
Blanchard and Urker's relationship began as penpals when she was serving nearly eight years in prison after pleading guilty to second degree-murder for her role in the death of her mother, Clauddine "Dee Dee" Blanchard in 2015.
Urker proposed in October 2018, but the couple later called off their engagement. While they were broken up, Blanchard married Ryan Anderson, who she was with when she was released from prison on parole in December 2023.
Blanchard announced her split with Anderson four months after her release from prison and reconciled with Urker shortly after in April 2024.
They welcomed their daughter, Aurora Raina Urker, in December 2024.
"Above all, Ken loved our daughter, Aurora," Blanchard told People. "She is a beautiful reflection of his enduring spirit, and through her, a part of him will always remain with us. I will make sure she grows up knowing how deeply her father loved her and who he was beyond what strangers on the internet chose to say about him."
If you are based in the USA, and you or someone you know needs mental health assistance right now, call or text 988, or visit 988lifeline.org to access online chat from the 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline. This is a free, confidential crisis hotline that is available to everyone 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
If you are experiencing feelings of distress, or are struggling to cope, you can speak to the Samaritans, in confidence, on 116 123 (UK and ROI) or visit the Samaritans website to find details of your nearest branch.
If you are in another country, you can go to www.befrienders.org to find a helpline near you