A UK travel company has suspended all operations, and holidaymakers due to take off in September have been told "do not travel".
Wayfairer Travel, a Bristol-based luxury travel company, has suspended all services "until further notice".
A spokesperson said: "We are truly sorry for the concern and uncertainty caused by the current situation. Wayfairer Travel has currently suspended all services until further notice.
"At this stage, we are unable to provide further information until we have received the appropriate accounting and legal advice."
The company, founded in 2012, operates holidays to destinations including the Maldives, Japan, Peru and Kenya.
Wayfairer Travel added that accounting and legal discussions are currently underway, with a formal update expected for customers this week.
"We appreciate your patience and sincerely apologise that we cannot provide greater clarity at this time," they added.
According to the Association of Bonded Travel Organisers Trust (Abtot), financial protection organisation, Wayfairer Travel Limited has notified customers that booked travel arrangements may not be provided.
On 2 September, the group said: "In light of the information currently available, Abtot is commencing a claims process for affected customers whose protected travel arrangements are not provided."
It added that holidaymakers with bookings on or before 30 September 2026 should not travel, with later departures instructed to await further information.
Wayfairer is not the first UK travel operator to cancel holidays this year.
In August, travellers were told to check the status of their upcoming ski holidays following the liquidation of another British travel company.
Ski Yodl Ltd cancelled all of its holiday bookings after more than eight years of operations.
The company, based in Norwich, Norfolk, launched in March 2018, selling ski holidays to several European destinations, as well as accommodation including self-catered ski chalets, apartments and hotels across the Alps.
SkiYodl was founded and run by Oliver Dannatt, a former private ski instructor for Richard Branson, and his business partner Simon Latarche.