Donald Trump has threatened a "major military punishment" against Iran after Yemen's Iran-backed Houthi rebels bombed two Saudi oil tankers off the coast of Saudi Arabia.
The attacks threaten to further disrupt oil supply in a sign that the war is spreading across the region, as the Houthis warn they will cut off the Bab al-Mandab strait, one of the critical waterways through which oil flows.
"The U.S. will hold Iran responsible, in that the Houthis are a Surrogate and/or Proxy of Iran, and major military punishment will be inflicted upon Iran," the US president wrote on Truth Social.
Trump also threatened punishment fore the Houthis, who he said he is "very disappointed with in that they have, until now, acted very professionally and smart".
It comes as US secretary of state Marco Rubio has claimed Iran is "begging for a deal" amid escalating tensions across the Middle East, while warning that Tehran will face intensifying US strikes "every night until they come to their senses".
The US military said it had carried out a 12th straight night of strikes against Iran in the early hours of Thursday, including the first use of B-1 long-range bombers in weeks.
Iran's Revolutionary Guard defends its strikes on Gulf states
Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) defended its attacks on US military bases in Kuwait and Jordan, arguing that the strikes were aimed at American forces rather than the Gulf states themselves.
Responding to accusations that Iran had violated the sovereignty of countries where US bases are located, the IRGC said such claims were "completely incorrect", according to Mehr state news agency.
In a message to Kuwait, it said: "It is America that has violated your territorial integrity and sovereignty, not us."
The IRGC argued that US military bases in Gulf countries were effectively under American control and claimed local officials could not access them without US permission.
It said: "We are attacking lands occupied by the US army."
The group added that the bases were being used to carry out "crimes" against Iran and said: "It is our legal, religious and logical right to target the invader of our country."
In a separate statement directed at Jordan, the IRGC said: "In our opinion, the independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of your government are completely respected."
Trump threatens 'major military punishment' against Iran after Houthi attack
Donald Trump has threatened a "major military punishment" against Iran, holding it responsible for attacks by Yemen's Iran-backed Houthi rebels bombed two Saudi oil tankers off the coast of Saudi Arabia.
The attacks threaten to further disrupt oil supply in a sign that the war is spreading across the region, as the Houthis warn they will cut off the Bab al-Mandab strait, one of the critical waterways through which oil flows.
"The U.S. will hold Iran responsible, in that the Houthis are a Surrogate and/or Proxy of Iran, and major military punishment will be inflicted upon Iran, and, of course, the Houthis, themselves, who I am very disappointed with in that they have, until now, acted very professionally and smart," the US president wrote on Truth Social.
Iran showed its 'true colours' by attacking neighbours during war with US, American envoy to UK says
The US ambassador to the UK, Warren Stephens, has said that Iran has shown its "true colours" by attacking several Arab countries during its war with the US.
Stephens told Sky News that the duration of renewed US attacks on Iran would "depend on Iran", particularly whether Tehran continues disrupting shipping through the Strait of Hormuz.
He said that "they've shown their hand" by attacking regional neighbours and "hopefully that's going to isolate this... regime".
Earlier, responding to accusations that Iran had violated the sovereignty of countries where US bases are located, Iran's Revolutionary Guard said such claims were "completely incorrect", according to Mehr state news agency.
In a message to Kuwait, it said: "It is America that has violated your territorial integrity and sovereignty, not us."
Pakistan PM condemns Houthi attacks on Saudi oil tankers
Pakistan's prime minister Shehbaz Sharif has condemned the Houthi attacks on Saudi oil tankers in the Red Sea, calling them unacceptable and a violation of international law.
Sharif wrote on X that he conveyed this directly to Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman and reaffirmed that Pakistan stands firmly with Saudi Arabia.
"I condemned, in the strongest possible terms, the Houthi militia's attacks against Saudi oil tankers in the Red Sea. Such actions are unacceptable, violate international law, threaten freedom of navigation, and undermine regional peace and security.
"I reaffirmed Pakistan's complete solidarity with the brotherly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and conveyed that I, together with Field Marshal Syed Asim Munir and the entire Pakistani nation, stand firmly and resolutely with the Saudi leadership and the brotherly people of the Kingdom at this critical time."
Iran could be the richest country in the Middle East, Rubio says
US secretary of state Marco Rubio has said that Iran's "lunatic" leaders, including the clerics, are holding the country back and that it could be "the richest country in the Middle East".
"Some of them are lunatics, some of them are evil, some of them are evil lunatics," he told reporters. He then added: "You can be both."
He said that Iran "is a country run by radical clerics," who are "oblivious" to economic issues.
"They are destroying their country," he said, adding: "But instead they take their money, and they use it and they give it to Hezbollah, they give it to Hamas, they give it to the Houthis. They give it to Shia militias. They give it to sponsored terrorism all over the world."
Rubio also repeated the US position that Iran can't have a nuclear weapon. "They cannot have nuclear weapons; I mean, imagine what they would do to the world," he said.
US uses B-1 long-range bomber for first time since fighting against Iran resumed
The US has escalated its military campaign against Iran by using a B-1 long-range bomber for the first time since fighting resumed 12 days ago, according to US officials.
The bomber was used to strike IRGC targets in Iran, Axios reported. B-1 aircraft can carry large numbers of heavy bombs and cruise missiles.
US Centcom said its strikes targeted Iranian military operations centres, maritime capabilities, aircraft hangars, drone storage facilities and logistics infrastructure to weaken Tehran's ability to threaten commercial shipping in the Strait of Hormuz.
However, it remains unclear what specific targets the B-1 hit.
Rubio claims Iran 'begging for a deal' amid escalating US strikes
The US secretary of state has claimed that Iran is "begging for a deal" with the US and that the "price on Iran will get higher every night until they come to their senses".
Speaking at the ASEAN conference in Manila, Marco Rubio said: "Iran is begging for a deal. It looks like Iran is not ready to make a deal, they will pay the price."
He added: "Every time they make a deal they either break it or change it."
Rubio said he hoped the Iran-backed Houthis will de-escalate. "They got snookered by Iran."
The secretary of state also commented on the nuclear deal with Saudi Arabia, saying: "Even when the official announcement is made, it will have to go through a congressional notification process.
"And then we can talk more in depth about it, but suffice it to say that the US is always looking for co-operation agreements with allies."
He called Saudi Arabia "a strategic ally" of Washington.
Iranian state media report two dead in latest US strikes
Iranian state media reported that two people were killed and 11 wounded in US strikes in southern Iran, near the country's border with Iraq.
The deaths were reported as part of the latest wave of American attacks, which the US military said targeted "maritime capabilities, missile and drone storage facilities, coastal surveillance sites, and air defence assets".
Centcom said in a statement on X: "The strikes further degrade Iran's ability to attack civilian mariners and commercial vessels."
According to Al Jazeera, explosions were reported in cities including Bushehr, Ahvaz, Sirik and Shalamcheh.
Centcom earlier today posted on X, saying it completed the 12th night of strikes on Iran.
Iran's Revolutionary Guard defends its strikes on Gulf states
Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) defended its attacks on US military bases in Kuwait and Jordan, arguing that the strikes were aimed at American forces rather than the Gulf states themselves.
Responding to accusations that Iran had violated the sovereignty of countries where US bases are located, the IRGC said such claims were "completely incorrect", according to Mehr state news agency.
In a message to Kuwait, it said: "It is America that has violated your territorial integrity and sovereignty, not us."
The IRGC argued that US military bases in Gulf countries were effectively under American control and claimed local officials could not access them without US permission.
It said: "We are attacking lands occupied by the US army."
The group added that the bases were being used to carry out "crimes" against Iran and said: "It is our legal, religious and logical right to target the invader of our country."
In a separate statement directed at Jordan, the IRGC said: "In our opinion, the independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of your government are completely respected."