The UK is on track for its hottest summer since records began, with persistent dry and hot weather plunging nearly three-quarters of England and the whole of Wales into drought.
Following a record dry July and very low levels of rain at the start of August, 27 million people are now under water-use restrictions, with 45 million people living in drought conditions, officials from the National Drought Group said on Monday.
Temperatures are expected to peak around 35C on Thursday in the south and parts of the Midlands and the Met Office has issued an amber "extreme heat" warning, meaning there is a risk to health and an increase in deaths, for much of England, covering parts of the south and east, as well as swathes of the Midlands.
It comes after prime minister Andy Burnham chaired a meeting of the government's emergency Cobra committee on Wednesday in response to extreme heat, marking the second meeting of its kind this year on heatwaves.
Where droughts have been declared:
The East Midlands, Lincolnshire and Northamptonshire, Kent and East Sussex, Solent and the South Downs are the latest areas to be added to the growing list affected by drought, joining Wales and the rest of the south and Midlands.
The North East and Yorkshire has also been categorised as having "prolonged dry weather" - the stage before drought - with nowhere now deemed in normal status.
Tony Grayling, strategic drought lead at the Environment Agency and chair of the National Drought Group, said: "Drought conditions are worsening and will continue to do so until we see significant and sustained rainfall.
"We know the hot and dry weather is taking a real toll on farming and there will be long-lasting impacts on our environment."
The drought continues to pile pressure onto farming, freight shipping and energy production after the country saw its driest July in 190 years.
August has so far seen just five per cent of the expected rainfall for the month, with warnings of more dry weather and highs of 38C to follow this week.
A drought usually refers to a period of prolonged, unusually dry weather that affects nature, the environment, and people.
In July, 19 counties across England recorded effectively no rainfall - 1mm or less - across the whole of the month, the Met Office figures show, causing river levels to fall and leaving ground dry and at risk of wildfires.
Firefighters raced to battle a major grass fire at a park in Exeter on Tuesday as conditions worsened in the south.
Devon and Somerset fire and rescue service said a large grass fire had broken out at Mincinglake Valley Park just before 3pm and advised people to stay away.
The summer of extreme weather has seen two record-breaking heatwaves, in May and June, which led to more than 2,800 excess deaths, and two more heatwaves in July which have fuelled drought and wildfires.
But the hot weather is set to continue as temperatures are forecast to soar into the mid-30s across the country on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday.
Amber heat health alerts issued by the UK Health Security Agency are in place for every region of England, and will remain in place until at least 9pm on Friday 14 August. As well as posing a risk to health, other impacts include disruption to transport and infrastruture.
Meanwhile, the Met Office has issued an amber weather warning for extreme heat covering a large part of England that includes London, the South East, East of England, West Midlands, and southern parts of Yorkshire.