Pierre Gasly delivered the shock of the season by taking the first pole position of his career for Sunday's Italian Grand Prix.
Gasly's improbable triumph arrived a day on from his Alpine boss Flavio Briatore accusing an FIA judge of having a "working relationship" with McLaren after the British team's appeal saw the Frenchman stripped of his podium from June's Monaco Grand Prix.
George Russell, widely expected to claim a much-needed pole in his world championship quest, had to settle for second, pipped to top spot by Gasly by just 0.060 seconds.
McLaren's Oscar Piastri finished third, with Charles Leclerc and Lewis Hamilton fourth and fifth respectively for Ferrari. Championship leader Kimi Antonelli took seventh but will start his home race from the back of the grid as he serves an engine penalty.
Follow live coverage of the Italian Grand Prix with The Independent
Charles Leclerc after qualifying P4:
"It's been a big struggle, we were nearly out in Q2. We've had many issues in the background, it's one of the most difficult tracks but that's not an excuse, Pierre and Alpine did everything perfect, very happy for Pierre.
"It's our job to try and recover what we lost, not sure pole position was possible. We need to maximise everything, today we didn't."
Lewis Hamilton after qualifying P5:
It was definitely very, very tough. Car felt good in practice, felt good in Q1, solid. And then we sat and waited very long in the pit-lane for the first run in Q2, for some reason we didn't have the pace.
"We need to look into that, execution in Q3 was pretty bad, ended up in middle of nowhere with nobody and when you're following another car, the braking distances adjust, it's all about rhythm and I got out of rhythm. It wasn't a terrible lap and ultimately we didn't maximise it.
On race: "We have a really great car, it's all Mercedes engines up ahead of us, they're gaining several tenths on the straights, that's what it is. I'm really greatful to the guys back in the factory, they did bring an upgrade, they are really pushing."
What is the full starting grid?
1. Pierre Gasly (Alpine)
2. George Russell (Mercedes)
3. Oscar Piastri (McLaren)
4. Charles Leclerc (Ferrari)
5. Lewis Hamilton (Ferrari)
6. Max Verstappen (Red Bull)
7. Franco Colapinto (Alpine)
8. Lando Norris (McLaren)
9. Arvid Lindblad (Racing Bulls)
10. Gabriel Bortoleto (Audi)
11. Ollie Bearman (Haas)
12. Nico Hulkenberg (Audi)
13. Liam Lawson (Red Bull)
14. Carlos Sainz (Williams)
15. Esteban Ocon (Haas)
16. Yuki Tsunoda (Racing Bulls)
17. Valtteri Bottas (Cadillac)
18. Sergio Perez (Cadillac)
19. Fernando Alonso (Aston Martin)
20. Lance Stroll (Aston Martin)
21. Kimi Antonelli (Mercedes)*
22. Alex Albon (Williams)*
*Will start back of the grid due to engine penalty
Lando Norris on team radio in qualifying:
"Is there nothing else I can do about these brakes right, no? I feel just htink it's going to go wrong into turn 1."
Norris will only start P8.
Oscar Piastri after qualifying third:
"The first lap felt quite good, tried to see if anyone wanted to go out in front in the pit-lane, misjudged the braking and locked up.
"Good to have a decent result at least, it's been a little while."
George Russell on Gasly's pole position:
"Massive congrats to Pierre, an incredible performance. We were finishing a game of chess 15 minutes before qualifying, he beat me there but I thought I'd beat him in quali.
"Pierre and Alpine have been very fast, happy to see them get a good result."
Pierre Gasly after his first-ever pole in F1:
"It was amazing, an incredible quali, I felt very good in the car, trying to chip a little bit away every session, it felt like a very good lap. It's been nine years to get the opportunity for pole, I got my first win in Monza and now got my first win."
His second bit was in Italian. Afraid, I don't speak Italian...
Gasly was 1000/1 to take pole position
And the first pole for Renault/Alpine since... 2009.
Stunning.
Top-10 in qualifying
1. Pierre Gasly (Alpine)
2. George Russell (Mercedes)
3. Oscar Piastri (McLaren)
4. Charles Leclerc (Ferrari)
5. Lewis Hamilton (Ferrari)
6. Max Verstappen (Red Bull)
7. Kimi Antonelli (Mercedes)*
8. Franco Colapinto (Alpine)
9. Lando Norris (McLaren)
10. Arvid Lindblad (Racing Bulls)
*Will start back of the grid due to engine penalty