Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
Top Simba Sleep discount codes and offers
If you're looking to upgrade your mattress or replace your bedding ready for the colder months, we've found the latest Simba Sleep discount codes to help cut the cost of your next order.
Our deals experts verify and update our Simba Sleep offers daily, hand-testing each code and removing any expired promotions. This page is also refreshed regularly with the latest saving tips, to help you secure top deals.
Today's best Simba Sleep deal
Right now, Simba Sleep's September sale is offering the best savings across the site, with up to 30 per cent off everything. This includes discounts on some of our favourite tried-and-tested picks, such as the hybrid luxe, with up to £640 off and the hybrid essential, with up to £200 off.
For students and keyworkers, the sale offers discounts of up to 31 per cent on all products. To unlock this saving, all you need to do is verify your eligibility through the Simba Sleep website.
The sale is only running until 1 October 2026, so if you've been looking to invest in a new mattress, Simba's sale is the perfect opportunity to do just that.
Best Simba Sleep deals and ways to save
Using a Simba voucher code is an easy way to knock money off your total. However, these aren't always available, so we've found all the ways you can save on your next Simba order.
Simba mattress sales
Occasionally, Simba holds seasonal sales with up to 30 per cent off sleep essentials, including mattresses, pillows, duvets and bedding. You'll usually see these limited-time promotions during key shopping periods such as Black Friday, January sales and bank holidays.
To make sure you never miss out on a sale, sign up to Simba's newsletter or check this article for updates.
Simba Sleep refurbished mattresses
If saving money is more of a priority than free extras, consider Simba Sleep's refurbished mattresses. These renewed mattresses are renovated with new materials and deep cleaned to hospital standards, according to Simba Sleep.
This is one of the best ways to save if no Simba voucher code is available to you. Plus, for extra peace of mind, your refurbished mattress is guaranteed for one year, with a full replacement sent should anything go wrong and the fault meet the brand's replacement criteria.
Simba Sleep student and keyworker discount
Simba Sleep offers a 26 per cent discount for keyworkers, students and charity workers, which is often increased during sale periods. All you need to do is verify your eligibility, and you'll receive exclusive promo codes to use on your next purchase.
Individuals who qualify for this discount include:
- NHS and healthcare workers
- Social workers
- Military staff
- Teachers
- Charity workers
- Students
- 18- to 25-year-olds
- Carers
Simba Sleep refer a friend scheme
You and a friend can benefit from Simba's referral scheme, with two free AeroDown pillows for you and two for your friend when they make their first purchase with Simba. Simply register using your email address to get your referral link and start sharing.
Remember that your friend must make their purchase through your referral link for the saving to work. The offer also only applies to orders of more than £300.
Free delivery on Simba Sleep orders
Simba offers free delivery to most UK postcodes. Depending on your order, this may be a one-person delivery to your door or a two-person delivery to a room of your choice. Delivery is usually available next day but may take between three to five days during sale periods.
If you'd rather choose your delivery slot or need your mattress on a specific date, named-day delivery is available for £10. You can also add the mattress setup and responsible packaging removal service for another £10.
Best Simba mattresses tested by our IndyBest team
As part of our review of the best mattresses 2026, the IndyBest team has tested the Simba hybrid essential, hybrid pro and hybrid luxe mattresses. Based on our testing, we think the hybrid essential offers the best value for most sleepers, while the hybrid luxe is worth considering when heavily discounted during seasonal sales.
New Simba mattresses come with a 200-night trial and a 10-year guarantee, giving you plenty of time to test out your new mattress at home. Refurbished mattresses come with a 30-night trial and a one-year guarantee.
Why choose a Simba Sleep mattress?
Simba Sleep 200-night trial and free returns
Simba Sleep offers flexible delivery, long trial periods and generous guarantees, making it easier to buy with confidence.
Simba offers a generous 200-night and free returns, so you'll have plenty of time to decide whether you're happy with your new mattress and pillows.
Simba Sleep 10-year guarantee
Simba's 10-year guarantee gives you peace of mind that if your product fails during that time, it will swap it for a brand-new one. Keep in mind this doesn't cover ordinary wear and tear or soiled items. However, if it's a fault such as cracked foam, a broken zip or significant dipping, you may be eligible for a swap.
Helpful FAQs
How do I redeem a Simba Sleep voucher code?
Once you have found the offer you want to use, click the "see code" button to reveal the voucher code and copy it. You will then be redirected automatically to the Simba Sleep homepage, or you can head back to your shopping cart in another tab. When you continue to checkout, you will see a designated "discount code" box - paste your code here and click "apply".
How can I save with Simba Sleep's referral programme?
Right now, if you refer a friend to Simba Sleep, you'll both receive two AeroDown pillows for free when they make a qualifying purchase.
Does Simba offer free returns?
Yes, with Simba's 200-night trial period, you can return the mattress for free if you decide it isn't right for you.
Is there a Simba student discount?
Simba Sleep offers students and young people aged 18-25 a sitewide discount of up to 26 per cent, which often rises to as much as 31 per cent during sale periods. To claim this offer, you'll need to verify your student status or age through the Simba Sleep website.
Can I combine Simba Sleep promo codes?
You can only apply one Simba Sleep promo code per order, but these can often be stacked with on-site sales. Remember to check the terms and conditions of the code to ensure sale items aren't excluded.
Does Simba Sleep have sales?
Simba Sleep occasionally runs seasonal sales and promotions. In the past, we've seen discounts of up to 30 per cent on bestselling products, including the brand's popular hybrid mattresses. Along with money-off deals, Simba has also been known to offer freebies such as pillows and mattress protectors with selected orders.
Can I get an NHS discount for Simba Sleep?
Yes, Simba usually offers 26 per cent off everything for keyworkers, including NHS staff, social workers, military personnel, teachers and charity workers. However, this discount is often increased during sale events. All you need to do to unlock the discount is verify your eligibility on the Simba Sleep website.
How we source the best Simba deals
Deputy IndyBest editor Sabrina Sahota (along with The Independent's team of deal-hunters) is dedicated to finding you the best savings. As Simba is an IndyBest tried-and-tested brand, we're always on the hunt for ways to help you shop Simba Sleep products for less.
Our team of deal-hunters search online and through Simba Sleep's own promotions to bring together the latest discount codes, sales and bundle offers in one place. We review and update this page each week to ensure our readers are getting the latest offers. We also hand-test each discount code and promotion daily, making sure to remove any expired offers and add new ones as they become available.
Why you can trust us
Here at The Independent, we're dedicated to helping you shop savvily. We only bring you deals from brands that we love and trust, with tried-and-tested reviews on as many products as possible. To sift through dud deals out there, our team of deal-hunters uses their expertise to find the best savings on the best-sellers, trending products and worthy investments.
*Offers are updated daily by our in-house deals team. Check the Simba Sleep website to full terms and conditions of promotions and discounts
Has all this talk of sleep got you feeling cosy? Take a look at our guide to the best weighted blankets to ease stress and anxiety