Celebrity blogger Perez Hilton is in a "serious but stable" condition following his admission to hospital, his family says.
Emergency services were called to the 48-year-old's Miami home on Tuesday after members of the public reported witnessing him self-harm during a TikTok livestream.
His account was suspended shortly after the incident.
In a statement posted to his website on Saturday, his family said that he remains in hospital.
They added: "Perez's condition remains serious but stable.
"He experienced significant blood loss and sustained additional injuries that will require surgery in the coming days."
His treatment and recovery "will be a long process", the family said.
"We are grateful that Perez was able to spend time with his mother and sister yesterday."
The statement said "his communication has been extremely limited and confined to immediate family, medical providers, and others directly involved in his care", adding that Hilton "has not communicated with the media or issued any public statements".
His website was the only place where "credible and authorised" updates would be given, the statement added.
"As our family remains focused on Perez's treatment and recovery, we also need the space and privacy to care for everyone affected by this situation."
Hilton's family and team previously said that it had been an "incredibly difficult" and "heartbreaking" time for them.
In a statement to media on Tuesday, the Miami-Dade Sheriff's Office confirmed that they attended a scene of a man "livestreaming acts of self-harm", but did not name Hilton.
Deputies confirmed that the man was alone in the house at the time.
Hilton, whose real name is Mario Armando Lavandeira Jr, rose to fame in the 2000s as a celebrity gossip blogger.
His pseudonym is a reference to Paris Hilton, who was at the pinnacle of her fame at the time of his blogging career.
His caustic attitude towards the stars he covered received criticism at the time, along with his practice of "outing" closeted gay celebrities.
The popularity of Hilton's blog eventually declined, and he moved into a career in reality television, appearing on shows including Celebrity Rap Superstar and Celebrity Big Brother.
Hilton has three children, a son and two daughters, born via surrogate.
If you are experiencing feelings of distress, or are struggling to cope, you can speak to the Samaritans, in confidence, on 116 123 (UK and ROI), email jo@samaritans.org, or visit the Samaritans website to find details of your nearest branch.
If you are based in the USA, and you or someone you know needs mental health assistance right now, call the National Suicide Prevention Helpline on 1-800-273-TALK (8255). This is a free, confidential crisis hotline that is available to everyone 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
If you are in another country, you can go to www.befrienders.org to find a helpline near you.