JD Vance has faced backlash after appearing to dismiss reports that a US strike killed five people, including two children, at a wedding gathering in southern Iran.
When asked about whether a US strike was responsible, he said "sometimes things happen".
He said: "I will say that the Iranian state media has not been a very good scribe about what's happened in the conflict thus far, so I'm extremely sceptical of this."
The toll was confirmed not by the Iranian government but by the Iranian Red Crescent, a member of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement.
"What I can say with 100% confidence is that, unlike the [Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps] IRGC, the United States never targets civilians in combat," Vance said. "We never will do that. We never have done that, and unfortunately, obviously, sometimes things happen."
Meanwhile, president Donald Trump insisted he had done the "right thing" with the war.
It comes amid fears Trump is planning to extend Washington's war on Iran, after The Wall Street Journal reported that the Pentagon was extending the presence of troops in the Middle East into next year.
Iranian officials acknowledge in private that US pressure is working
Three senior Iranian sources have told the Reuters news agency that the US campaign to throttle Iran's economy by blockading its oil exports is growing increasingly difficult to withstand.
While Iran's clerical rulers have managed to get around harsh sanctions for decades, the latest US movements have left them in a far more sensitive position, with few remaining channels to secure foreign currency or buy goods, the sources said.
Iran publicly maintains that it has plenty foreign currency reserves and is not meaningfully affected by the US crackdown on sanctions evasion.
The latest measures expanded secondary sanctions that target countries doing business with Iran in a bid to stop it clearing dollar transactions needed for both oil sales and to finance crucial imports of goods and raw materials.
That effort is making Iran's existing sanctions evasion networks - front companies, unregistered tankers and smuggling - too expensive to use, the three senior sources said.
One of the sources said Iran only has another two months' supply of gasoline, which has to be imported due to limited refining capacity.
Araghchi defends Iran over strikes on Jordan
Iranian foreign minister Abbas Araghchi takes to social media to respond to his Jordanian counterpart's recent comments criticising Iran for strikes on Jordan and neighbouring countries.
The Jordanian minister Ayman Safadi said that attacks on his country came within two hours of the start of the war, in February, suggesting the attack was not reactionary.
Araghchi writes: "How much time does the Jordanian Foreign Minister believe Iran should wait before responding to an aggressor that respects neither Arab sovereignty nor Iranian sovereignty?"
He adds: "And is he truly unaware that Arab airspace, lands, and waters were used in the initial American attacks that resulted in the killing of innocent Iranians?"
Evidence points to US weapon in deadly strike on Iran wedding celebration
The United States is investigating a deadly strike on a wedding gathering in southern Iran after weapons experts reviewing verified images and video concluded the blast was likely caused by a direct hit from a U.S. munition, Vice President JD Vance said Thursday.
Five people have died following Tuesday's strike on a home hosting the celebration, according to Iranian state television, which reported Thursday that a 22-year-old woman had died from her injuries. Iranian officials said nearly 70 others were wounded.
Speaking to reporters Thursday, Vance confirmed U.S. authorities were examining what happened.
"We're investigating it because obviously we care. We want to know," Vance said.
Trump claims US has 'unlimited' munitions amid Iran war concerns
Donald Trump has denied persistent reports that the Iran war has dangerously depleted the U.S. weapons stockpile, blasting the media for what he claimed was false reporting on the state of the American arsenal.
"For the treasonous SCUM that refuses to accurately report on our Military Operation in Iran, we have virtually unlimited amounts of Mid to High Grade Ammunition, far more than we could ever use for this, or for any other War (which is highly unlikely!), that could improbably take place," he wrote Thursday on Truth Social.
"In addition, we are producing Munitions at levels never seen before," he added. "We are stockpiling and preparing for any contingency that could happen."
In focus: Sailors on USS Abraham Lincoln describe 'the worst deployment'
US service members assigned to the USS Abraham Lincoln are speaking out about their record-long, nearly nine-month deployment at sea, during which they supported the ongoing Iran war.
The Nimitz-class aircraft carrier - some of whose crew had reportedly suffered from deteriorating mental health - laid anchor off Thailand this week, affording its 5,000 sailors and Marines their first port call in 286 days.
While on shore in the resort town of Pattaya, some service members spoke with MS NOW Pentagon Correspondent Priya Sridhar, who recounted her discussions with them during a subsequent on-camera interview.
Read the full report:
Watch: White House launches arcade games based on Trump's agenda
This morning: Asian benchmarks mostly rise after tech stocks lead rally on Wall Street
Asian shares were mostly higher in early Friday trading, as regional market sentiment got a boost from the rally on Wall Street, mostly from big technology stocks.
Japan's benchmark Nikkei 225 rose 0.6% in morning trading to 64,622.33. South Korea's Kospi gained 0.9% to 6,635.67. Australia's S&P/ASX 200 was little changed, slipping less than 0.1% to 9,011.80. Hong Kong's Hang Seng jumped 2.1% to 25,751.26, while the Shanghai Composite added 0.8% to 3,973.27.
Stocks on Wall Street closed higher Thursday as a recent run-up in bond yields eased further and big technology companies rallied. The S&P 500 rose 1.1%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 1.2%, and the Nasdaq composite closed 1.4% higher.
The latest:
Shipping traffic through Hormuz well below normal, Kpler data says
Shipping traffic through the Strait of Hormuz remained well below normal on Thursday, with only four commodity vessels crossing the key waterway, according to preliminary Kpler data cited by Reuters.
That was down from nine crossings the day before and well below the 10-day average of about 15.
The vessels included two medium-range tankers, a Kamsarmax tanker and a Handysize vessel.
Vance refuses to give a deadline to end US war on Iran
JD Vance has declined to give a timeline for ending the US war on Iran, while downplaying the conflict by saying there was no active shooting and major combat had lasted only about six weeks.
"I wouldn't call it a war. Right now, there is no active shooting," Vance said. He added: "I recognise there have been places where this has flared up."
"When you ask, 'When will this end?', you're asking me a question like: When will the Iranians stop shooting at ships?" Vance told reporters.
"I think the reality is, I don't know the answer to that question. You'd have to ask the Iranians."
His remarks come after days of intense fighting between the US and Iran.
Israel says economic pressure on Iran could push the regime to take 'desperate steps'
Israel's defence minister has warned that growing economic pressure could push Tehran to take more desperate measures.
"We see signs indicating that the heavy economic pressure they are under, and the fear of an uprising and the collapse of the regime, may push them to desperate steps," Israel Katz said.
Earlier, Iran had claimed that it had the capability to manufacture more missile stockpiles and maintained enough in its war against the US"Initially, some believed that Iran had only a limited number of missiles and that its stockpiles would eventually be depleted as the war continued," the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps spokesperson Brig Gen Hossein Mohebbi said.
"However, that assumption proved incorrect, as Iran's missile capability has remained sustained and its missile production has continued."