Arsenal were dealt a blow in one of their summer transfer pursuits as Vinicius Jr has signed a contract extension with Real Madrid. The Gunners have moved on from targeting the winger and have reignited their interest in Atletico Madrid's Julian Alvarez while PSG's Bradley Barcola is also on their list.
In more positive news, Bruno Guimaraes has completed a medical at Arsenal ahead of his £75m move from Newcastle United. The 28-year-old midfielder is now expected to be announced as a new Gooner on Friday ahead of Arsenal's pre-season fixtures this weekend. The deal represents a key piece of business of Mikel Arteta ahead of Arsenal's title defence.
Liverpool, meanwhile, also want to sign Barcola from Paris Saint-Germain and have also lined up his teammate Ibrahim Mbaye in what could be a double swoop for Andoni Iraola's side. The European champions may be willing to let them go especially following Maghnes Akliouche signing from Monaco.
Elsewhere, Manchester United have added to their ranks by bringing in a teenage midfielder and they are exploring their options at left-back with Lewis Hall reportedly now set on a move to Old Trafford, but Newcastle are determined to stop the exodus and insist he is not for sale.
Follow all of the latest news, rumours and done deals with our live blog below:
Barcola on Arsenal's radar
More alternatives are creeping out for Arsenal now that their pursuit of Vinicius Jr is over.
The Sun believe that Maghnes Akliouche's arrival at PSG, on a €50m move, means the French champions will be more willing to sell players.
That could have a knock on effect for the future of Bradley Barcola.
Liverpool are said to be in pole position to sign the winger but Arsenal have previously been interested in his services though they remain a way off in terms of valuations.
PSG rate him at around £130m and Arsenal are nowhere as high in their own valuations.
Arsenal identify Vinicius Jr alternatives
Vinicius Jr's contract extension with Real Madrid was a blow to Arsenal as there had been serious interest and confidence that a deal could be done.
Alas, that was not to be the case and the Gunners have swiftly moved their attentions elsewhere with The Standard reporting that they have already agreed personal terms with Atletico Madrid's Julian Alvarez.
They cite a report from Bem Jacobs that Alvarez has been seen as Arsenal's back up in case the Vinicius Jr move didn't pay off as well as other rumours from X (formerly Twitter), over the personal terms being agreed.
I'd take that last part with a pinch of slat but Arsenal's interest in Alvarez has been long-standing.
The Atletico striker is said to favour a switch to Barcelona but has not ruled out a return to the Premier League.
Good morning!
Welcome to The Independent's coverage of today's latest transfer news and gossip.
Arsenal's pursuit of Vinicius Jr is over after the winger signed a new deal with Real Madrid on Thursday. That means the Gunners are looking of alternative options and have reportedly landed back on Atletico Madrid's Julian Alvarez.
They also hold an interest in Bradley Barcola though Liverpool are closer to securing a deal for the PSG forward.
Man Utd, meanwhile, have signed a surprising midfielder and are in the market for left-back cover.
We'll go through all the latest rumours and done deals throughout the day so let's begin...
Uefa doubles down on Fifa boycott but holds greater weapon to unseat Gianni Infantino
Uefa and other key stakeholders in European football are intent on doubling down on their plan to unseat Gianni Infantino as Fifa president, with boycotts and non co-operation set to continue, to the point of potentially making the global game "ungovernable".
The Swiss official is himself determined to stay in his position, as illustrated by Wednesday's defiant Fifa statement. Infantino is aware he still has the numbers to win March's election.
Uefa nevertheless signalled its own intent by stating that Fifa's response so far does not meet the threshold for their boycott of Fifa competitions to be lifted, specifically pointing to how there have not been "assurances" that attempts like the privatisation of the World Cup "to disfigure the game in this way will never be made again".
Atletico confident they can beat Inter to Romero signature
Atletico Madrid are confident they can beat Inter Milan to the signing of Cristian Romero, according to The Times.
Inter have a broad agreement with Tottenham over a deal for the departing defender, but Atletico feel the Argentine would rather join them.
Vinicius Jr signs Real Madrid contract extension to end Arsenal hopes
Vinicius Jr has penned a contract extension with Real Madrid until 2032, ending Arsenal's hopes of signing the Brazilian superstar this summer.
Premier League champions Arsenal were hopeful of acquiring Vinicius in a statement move, looking to poach the winger who had one year left on his contract at the Santiago Bernabeu.
Their interest came as contract negotiations between Vinicius and Madrid were stalling, with there initially being considerable distance in stances on a new deal as Vinicius' camp demanded a proposal comparable to Kylian Mbappe's.
But as Arsenal made progress in negotiations, Real Madrid upped their offer to convince Vinicius to sign on the dotted line and stay put, which was the preference for both the Spanish giants and the player.
Real Madrid to put two Man Utd targets up for sale?
Real Madrid could make two Manchester United targets available for purchase - French midfielders Aurelien Tchouameni and Eduardo Camavinga - in order to free up funds so they can sign Spain midfielder Rodri from Manchester City, according to El Nacional.
This comes after reports that Barcelona are growing in confidence that they can successfully pip their rivals to the signing of Rodri, who are set to make an approach.
Aston Villa braced for Konsa bid
Aston Villa are braced for a fresh bid from Arsenal for England defender Ezri Konsa amid attempts to tie him to a new contract, according to the Daily Mail.
The same outlet says Villa are looking to sign Italian left-back Matteo Ruggeri from Atletico Madrid in a £14m deal.
Dykes set for Millwall move
Scotland striker Lyndon Dykes has completed a medical ahead of a one-year deal with Millwall.
Dykes last played for Charlton Athletic during the second half of last season but knocked back an extension at the club.