Lennox Lewis has questioned whether Anthony Joshua should box again after the Briton's chaotic win over Kristian Prenga.
On 25 July, Joshua was floored two times in the first round before stopping Prenga in the second frame. With that remarkable win in Saudi Arabia, "AJ" stayed on track for a contracted super-fight with Tyson Fury.
However, heavyweight legend Lewis has suggested that such a bout might not be a smart move for Joshua, whose win over Prenga marked his first outing since a car crash in December.
Joshua was injured in the accident in Nigeria, while two of his teammates - Sina Ghami and Latif "Latz" Ayodele - were killed.
"Does he really belong in the ring right now?" Lewis asked The Ring.
"A virtual novice put him on the ground twice in the first round.
"Is that it? Have we seen the last of him?"
Joshua's accident took place 10 days after the former world heavyweight champion stopped YouTuber-turned-boxer Jake Paul in six rounds.
AJ's previous bout was a knockout loss to Daniel Dubois in 2024, in which Joshua was dropped four times.
Meanwhile, Fury suffered two points losses to Oleksandr Usyk in 2024, before retiring from boxing for the fifth time at the start of 2025. He returned this April, outpointing Arslanbek Makhmudov, and - one day before Joshua beat Prenga - he stopped Mariusz Wach in seven rounds.
Enjoy 185+ fights a year on DAZN, the Global Home of Boxing
Never miss a fight from top promoters. Watch on your devices anywhere, anytime.
Enjoy 185+ fights a year on DAZN, the Global Home of Boxing
Never miss a fight from top promoters. Watch on your devices anywhere, anytime.
That bout in Thailand, which was not broadcast anywhere, saw another hurdle removed en route to Joshua vs Fury; the Prenga and Wach fights were billed as final warm-up contests for the all-British heavyweight showdown.
Joshua vs Fury has been mooted to take place at London's Wembley Stadium in November, although the US is reportedly still on the table as a possible destination.
Saudi matchmaker Turki Alalshikh has suggested that ring walks at Wembley would have to take place at 2am GMT, in order to capture a greater global audience. However, Joshua's promoter Eddie Hearn has insisted that the fight must take place on British soil.
Lewis, 60, was born in Britain but represented Canada as a professional, having moved there as a child. He is a former three-time world heavyweight champion, who also held undisputed status. Joshua, 36, and Fury, 37, are both former two-time champions.