Coral, one of the best betting sites on the UK market, is running one of the best casino sign up offers providing 100 free spins after playing £10 on online slots.
Coral Casino is a trusted, UKGC-licensed site run by one of the UK's favourite bookies, whose brick-and-mortar presence on UK high streets stretches back to 1926.
The Coral welcome offer for new customers is a simple casino bonus that provides 100 free spins to use on Coral's UK online casino, featuring exclusive slot titles and a raft of promotions.
We've produced a guide to give you more information, as well as additional detail on how to claim the Coral Casino bonus, the key terms and a concise Coral Casino review.
Coral Casino sign up offer explained
The Coral Casino welcome offer is simple play and get free spins bonus offer, which credits new customers with 100 no wagering free spins
New customers need to spend £10 on any slot to qualify, with no need to use a Coral Casino bonus code. Once customers have completed £10 worth of wagering, 100 free spins are released to use on select slot game titles.
Eligible slot games are as follows: Eye of Horus The Golden Tablet, Fishin' Frenzy Lure 'Em In, Fishin Frenzy Off The Hook, Fishin Frenzy The Big Catch 2, Fishin' Frenzy The Big Catch Gold Spins, Game of Thrones, King Kong Cash Even Bigger Bananas 4, King Kong Splash, Luck O' the Irish Fortune Play 2, The Goonies Quest For Treasure 2, 3 Little Sheeps, Big Banker, Blagg Brothers Safecracker, Devil's Lucky Spins, Lock O' The Irish, Lock O' The Irish 3, Midas And The Golden Reels Infinity Fortune, Pig Banker, Pig Banker Bacon Train, Well Well Well.
Spins must be accepted within 48 hours and used within seven days. The offer is available to new customers only, and is not valid with Neteller, PayPal, Paysafecard, Skrill or pre-paid cards.
How to claim the Coral Casino bonus
Below is a step-by-step guide on how to claim the Coral casino sign up offer:
Step 1: Register for a Coral Casino account (you must be a new customer).
Step 2: Deposit £10 or more using an eligible payment method - this does not include Neteller, PayPal, Paysafecard, Skrill, or pre-paid cards.
Step 3: Spend at least £10 on any online slot to fulfil offer requirements.
Step 4: Claim 100 no wagering free spins within 48 hours.
Step 5: Use your casino bonus within seven days on the eligible slot titles.
Key terms and conditions
In this section, we have provided a brief breakdown of the most important terms of the Coral Casino bonus. However, remember to check the full T&Cs online before opting in to the offer:
- Offer is open to new players only - one offer per household/device/IP.
- New users must stake a minimum of £10 on any slot to qualify.
- Free spins are awarded automatically once criteria are met.
- Casino bonus can be used on variety of online slots.
- 100 free spins are worth £0.10 each and are valid for seven days.
- Spins are non-withdrawable and must be used on selected Coral slot games.
- Deposits made via Neteller, Skrill, PayPal, Paysafecard, and some pre-paid cards are not eligible.
Why choose Coral?
There are several reasons why a user might opt for Coral's online casino rather than many of the other best casino sites in the UK.
For a start, the casino is part of a trusted UK brand with years of experience, and it is licensed and regulated by the UK Gambling Commission meaning that players can rest assured that they are playing on safe, fair sites that do everything to keep their data safe.
For new users, the Coral Casino bonus of 100 free spins is a solid reward for just £10, with no matched bonus or high-risk requirements as the free spins come with no wagering. In addition, it is easy to opt in to, with a fair expiry period.
Once users have signed up, they will find that the Coral offer provides a wide variety of slot games, jackpot slots and exclusive titles, as well as a range of offers for existing customers.
Perhaps most importantly, customers will also discover that the Coral online casino provides a positive overall user experience, including an efficient website and casino app offering as well as good customer support options.
Finally, Coral Casino is committed to safer gambling and offers responsible gambling tools as well as simple access to player support.
Comparison with other new casino offers
Below is a table comparing the Coral Casino welcome offer with similar offers from some of the best slot sites and new casinos on the market.
Responsible Gambling
Always practice responsible gambling. When using gambling sites be aware that betting can be addictive.
Please take steps to remain in control of your time and budget. The same applies whether you're using casino apps, betting apps, poker sites or any other gambling medium.
Even the most knowledgeable punter can lose a bet, so always stick to a budget and never chase your losses.
It's particularly important not to get carried away by betting sign up offers or casino offers, both of which are available in abundance on gambling apps, but must be approached with caution.
You can stay in control by making use of the responsible gambling tools offered, such as deposit limits, loss limits, self-exclusion and time-outs.
You may also want to visit the following free organisations to discuss any issues with gambling you might be having:
We may earn commission from some of the links in this article, but we never allow this to influence our content. This revenue helps to fund journalism across The Independent.
We aim to offer every online gambler and reader of The Independent a safe and fair platform through unbiased reviews and offers from the UK's best online gambling companies.
Gambling can be addictive, always play responsibly and only bet what you can afford to lose. Gambling sites have a number of tools to assist you to stay in control, including deposit limits and time outs. If you think you have a problem, advice and support is available for you now from BeGambleAware or Gamcare.
Any offers or odds listed in this article are correct at the time of publication but are subject to change. Terms & Conditions apply to all offers.