You know it from the very first note of that rolling opening piano sequence. It's been 50 years since "Dancing Queen" by the Swedish group Abba first topped the charts in the UK, a track hailed by many as "the perfect pop song" and one that continues to be played at birthdays, weddings, karaoke sessions and concerts around the world.
On 4 September 1976, the tune that has long been regarded as the band's signature reached number one on the UK Singles Chart and stayed there for six weeks - their fourth UK number one after hits "Waterloo", "Mamma Mia" and "Fernando".
At the time the song was being recorded, as part of their fourth studio album Arrival, the band were under pressure due to a slow creative period following their 1974 Eurovision triumph with "Waterloo" - recording sessions were frequently interrupted by promotional obligations.
They finally recorded "Dancing Queen" - their first attempt at disco - in August 1975. In his authorised biography Melancholy Undercover: The Book of Abba by Jan Gradvall, who conducted new interviews with bandmembers Björn Ulvaeus, Benny Andersson, Anni-Frid Lyngstad and Agnetha Fältskog, Gradvall said the inspiration for the famous rhythm came from two sources.
"One was George McCrae's 'Rock Your Baby', one of the first disco recordings, a song that had been released the year before and which the members of Abba had heard many times at Alexandra," he wrote.
"The other was the New Orleans rhythm on the 1972 album Dr John's Gumbo, which Roger Palm had been listening to."
"These two templates were American," he continued. "But when Abba plays disco there is an unmistakably European sound to it. The song opens with Benny running his finger over the keys on the Bolin grand piano, then the song starts - and it is always slower than you remember."
The original working title for "Dancing Queen", he revealed, was "Boogaloo" - the title we know and love today was suggested by the band's manager, Stig Anderson.
We couldn't believe how good it sounded
When the recording was completed, Ulvaeus and Andersson understood that they had achieved something special: "They went home late that night, ready to play it for their respective partners."
"I cried when I heard it,' Lyngstad recalled. "I thought it was so incredibly beautiful."
Fältskog was asleep when Ulvaeus returned home and he "didn't want to wake her", so he went to his sister's home instead: "I played it for her over and over," he said.
"We couldn't believe how good it sounded."
"Dancing Queen" was released in 1976 as the lead single from Arrival and soon became a global hit, topping the charts in the US (as their only No 1 in the States) as well as the UK, Australia, Canada, Ireland, Spain, Portugal and Norway.
It was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame in 2015 and is consistently ranked as one of the greatest pop songs of all time.
Of course, its innate catchiness helped secure its success, but it was also the misty-eyed, nostalgia-seeped tone of the lyrics, casting the listener as someone gazing back on their lost youth and putting them right back in that moment: "You're the dancing queen/ Young and sweet/ Only seventeen."
Indeed, "Dancing Queen" commands so much respect that it has won over grizzled punks and rock veterans, too. Bono has covered the track during U2 concerts, as have Metallica's Kirk Hammett and Robert Trujillo. Elvis Costello borrowed the piano chords for his song, "Oliver's Army". Then-prime minister Theresa May notoriously, regrettably, danced to it onstage for a keynote conference speech in 2018.
Speaking to The Guardian, Judy Craymer, who came up with the hit stage show and film Mamma Mia!, suggested the show's success had helped pass on Abba's music down the generations.
"An 89-year-old would say, 'That's our song,' but children can learn it, too, almost like a nursery rhyme, and it's very attractive to them," he said.
Proving her point: BBC Radio 2 listeners voted "Dancing Queen" as their favourite Abba song in 2024. "'Dancing Queen' is one of those songs that just makes you happy every time you hear it," presenter Gary Davies said at the time, "and still gets any dancefloor full to this day - a guaranteed singalong."