Andy Burnham said Britain will continue to "act in support of our values" after Israel retaliated against UK sanctions on goods from illegal settlements in the West Bank.
"The suffering of the Palestinian people is a scar on the conscience of the world," the prime minister said, adding that "Britain must be willing to lead."
His statement came after Israel announced a raft of countermeasures, which included the closure of the British consulate in Jerusalem.
Foreign minister Gideon Saar said the Labour government "has left us no choice but to respond to its hostile actions", as he also declared that 12 British officials, including Jeremy Corbyn, were banned from the country.
Earlier, foreign secretary Ed Miliband accused Israel of "turning a blind eye" to the ethnic cleansing of Palestinians living in the West Bank, who are increasingly under pressure to relocate from settlers.
"The British government agrees that there is ethnic cleansing of Palestinians in areas of the West Bank - perpetrated by settler terrorists."
In what is the UK's strongest intervention yet, the foreign secretary said it was for the courts to determine if Israel committed genocide in Gaza.
MP banned from Israel says sanction 'will not intimidate me into silence'
Richard Burgon, who was among the 12 people banned from Israel on Tuesday, said the sanction "will not intimidate me into silence".
The Labour MP wrote on X: "I've repeatedly called for sanctions on Israel over its war crimes and ethnic cleansing, including by providing evidence to the International Criminal Court."
"The decision of the Netanyahu government to sanction me today will not intimidate me into silence.
"I will continue to do what is right, speak out in defence of international law and stand up for justice for the Palestinian people."
ICYMI: Jeremy Corbyn and Diane Abbot among 12 British officials banned from Israel
Former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn and Labour MP Diane Abbott are among the 12 individuals banned from entering Israel in the wake of the British government's sanctions, the Israeli government has announced.
Earlier, Israel's foreign minister said 12 publicly elected British officials will be banned from Israel along with others "who are involved in anti-Israeli and anti-Semitic activities".
Also on the list in MP Zarah Sultana, Fahad Ansari, the director of Riverway to the Sea, MP Naz Shah, MP Hannah Spencer, MP Carla Denyer, MP Sian Berry, MP Ellie Chowns, MP John McDonnell, MP Richard Burgon, and MP Adrian Ramsay.
Analysis: This is why UK sanctions against West Bank settlers are so seismic
The UK's decision to sanction Israeli settlers in the West Back has caused a furious diplomatic row. Britain's historical role in the establishment of Israel tells us why the move has such potency beyond the negligible economic impact, explains world affairs editor Sam Kiley:
UK must now deal with consequences of sanctions, says ex-cabinet secretary
A former cabinet secretary has said it is important the UK now "deals with the consequences" of the sanctions and maintain good relations with Israel.
Mark Sedwill told Sky News that the government must remember "we have an important defence and security relationship that needs to be preserved," adding: "I hope that behind the scenes there is work going on to maintain that.
The ex-diplomat said: "We've got to look at the US relationship. What's the reaction going to be from Washington? We've had contrasting signals from there: Marco Rubio (US secretary of state) quite measured. The US ambassador in Israel, Mike Huckabee, quite inflammatory - let's see.
"That's the way the Trump administration sometimes works. It's difficult to interpret."
Netanyahu spokesman condemns Miliband's 'preposterous' claims
A spokesperson for Benjamin Netanyahu has labelled Ed Miliband's claims as "preposterous".
Doron Spielman told Sky News that the foreign secretary had essentially said "Jewish people are no longer allowed to live in Judea.
"There are hundreds of thousands of Jewish people in Judea. Most of them go to work on a daily basis. Their mothers and fathers are children," he said.
He admitted there twas crime there and said Israel condemned "all crime, whether it's Jewish crime or Arab crime".
"No one deserves to live under crime, to be threatened or to be intimidated. And therefore if there are Jews who are doing it, we condemn it, we bring them to justice. And if there are Arabs who are doing it, we bring them to justice."
'UK and Israel governments putting politics before national interest'
The British and Israeli governments are more interested in politics than the national interest, the president of the Board of Deputies of British Jews has said.
Phil Rosenberg told Sky News: "I think actually we're stuck as people who care about that bilateral relationship with two governments who are more interested in their political interests than the national interest.
"You've seen this kind of tit for tat, and it's been building for a while.
"I don't think it serves the cause that we want to see, which is a path to a two-state solution, the cause of peace, de-escalation and the best possible relations we can see between the UK and Israel."
Government now face test of enforcing sanctions, says Amnesty
The government's sanctions on Israel are "a significant change of course", but must be properly enforced, the chief executive of Amnesty International UK has said.
Kerry Moscogiuri said: "Today's announcement is hugely welcome. The foreign secretary promised a 'comprehensive reset' and today could be the sea change that is needed.
"The UK government has committed to concrete action and recognised Israel's unlawful occupation and ethnic cleansing.
"Amid ethnic cleansing, genocide and apartheid against Palestinians, today's measures are a genuine step towards accountability for Israel's repeated and flagrant violations of international law.
"But today is not the end of the road. The test now is whether these commitments are properly implemented and enforced, and followed by the wider action needed to hold Israel accountable for its crimes and meet the UK's obligations under international law."
ICYMI: Israel closes British consulate and bans 12 officials
Earlier today, Israel announced several countermeasures in response to the UK's trade sanctions on illegal Israeli settlements. They include:
- The closure of the British Consulate in Jerusalem.
- The denial of entry to Israel to 12 individuals, including Jeremy Corbyn, Diane Abbott, and 9 other MPs.
- The removal of British representatives from the International Gaza Support Centre in Kiryat Gat.
- The termination of British activities to train Palestinian Authority forces in Judea and Samaria under the "British Support Team in Ramallah".
Israeli foreign minister thanks Badenoch for her 'firm opposition'
Israeli's foreign minister has spoken with Kemi Badenoch following the raft of countermeasures he imposed on the UK.
Gideon Saar said he thanked the Tory leader and shadow foreign secretary Tom Tugendhat for their "firm opposition to the hostile Labour Government's announcement today and its series of anti-Israel policies since taking office".
He added: "I welcomed their support for the friendship with Israel and their commitment for the future relations between our countries.
"We know that we have many friends in the UK, but unfortunately we are faced with the ongoing hostility of the current Labour government."
Corbyn says 'Israel doesn't want the world to see what it is doing' after being banned
My statement on Israel's decision to ban me and 10 other British MPs from entry.
"I have visited all parts of Palestine on several occasions, where I have witnessed the horrors of occupation, as well as the resilience and humanity of the Palestinian people.
They are the ones...