Arsenal are preparing a huge bid for Bruno Guimaraes as the Premier League champions chase more reinforcements in a busy summer at the club. And the Gunners are also interested in signing in Vinicius Jr as the Brazilian winger's contract runs down at Real Madrid.
Mikel Arteta's side are also set to sign a centre-back this summer after it was confirmed that Premier League title winner William Saliba has been ruled out for an "extended period" with a back injury. The Gunners could turn to Manchester City centre-back John Stones, who is available as a free agent, while they have announced the signing of 24-year-old forward Christos Tzolis from Club Brugge.
Manchester United are still interested in adding another midfielder after signing Andrey Santos and Youri Tielemans and have "reached an agreement in principle" with France international Manu Kone, according to reports in Italy. Aurelien Tchouameni remains a target, too. Alejandro Garnacho has joined Aston Villa on loan from Chelsea, after their record signing of Morgan Rogers.
Liverpool boss Andoni Iraola has set out his targets for the transfer window and has confirmed the Reds "definitely need to sign a winger". Liverpool have now reportedly turned their attention towards Monaco's Maghnes Akliouche, who is also wanted by Paris Saint-Germain, while PSG's Bradley Barcola is also still a target.
Follow the latest transfer news, rumours and reports with our live blog below:
Leeds chasing Julian Brandt
Free agent Julian Brandt is garnering interest from Leeds following his departure from Borussia Dortmund.
The 30-year-old midfielder is also being pursued by Ajax but Sky Sports News are reporting that he is understood to prefer a move to Elland Road because he is fascinated by the idea of playing in the Premier League.
Brandt would also be interested in a move to Serie A should a concrete proposal materialise soon.
Arsenal eyeing shock deal for Real Madrid star Vinicius Jr
A reminder of the big news that broke yesterday - Arsenal are keen to buy Vinicius Jr from Real Madrid.
The Gunners are exploring a blockbuster move for the Brazilian superstar and the idea has reportedly been approved by the club's hierarchy.
There has been no club-to-club contact with Real Madrid yet, however.
It is unclear what Vinicius makes of the idea of joining the Premier League champions, and indeed leaving Madrid, although Jose Mourinho coming in as Real boss does complicate matters for the 26-year-old, who only has one year left on his contract.
Kane ready to begin Bayern contract talks.
Harry Kane will begin contract talks with Bayern Munich when he returns from his summer holiday
That's according to Sky Sports News, who say that Kane is garnering interest from Barcelona but is very happy in Germany.
Kane's deal expires at the end of the 2026/27 season and the England captain is said to be very relaxed about the situation but Bayern are keen to start negotiations given the interest surrounding him.
DONE DEAL: Jack Harrison leaves Leeds for MLS
Winger Jack Harrison has left Leeds to join MLS side New England Revolution on a four-year deal for an undisclosed fee.
Harrison began his career in the MLS with New York City in the 2016-17 season before earning a move to sister club Man City and has also had loan spells at Everton and Fiorentina.
The 29-year-old joins as one of the Revolution's designated players.
Inter confirm Romero interest
Cristian Romero has seemed like a good candidate to leave Tottenham this summer and Inter Milan have now confirmed their interest in buying the centre-back.
According to Fabrizio Romano, Inter's sporting director Piero Ausilio has acknowledged that the Argentine defender is of interest to them this summer.
"We are interested for sure, it's true," Romano claims Ausilio said. "We spoke to the agent and Tottenham. We will see what happens."
Pedro Neto set to stay put
Talking of Chelsea, they are not actively looking to sell Pedro Neto to Liverpool or any other club.
Liverpool are interested in the 26-year-old Portuguese winger, according to The Evening Standard, but no club has yet contacted Chelsea over a possible move.
The Blues would be open to considering a proposal but would prefer to keep Neto as part of Xabi Alonso's squad this season.
Chelsea reject latest Como bid for Chalobah
Chelsea have turned down a third offer from Como for centre-back Trevoh Chalobah as they hold out for £30m + £5m in add-ons.
According to talkSPORT, Chalobah has been a major target for the Italian club, coached by ex-Chelsea midfielder Cesc Fabregas, but their latest proposal of £25m + £5m was deemed not enough.
The 27-year-old England international reportedly remains keen on move and is still likely to leave, with the imminent arrival of Maxence Lacroix pushing him further down the pecking order.
Man City, Arsenal and Liverpool out of running for Yan Diomande
Yan Diomande has verbally agreed personal terms with Real Madrid, leaving just the Spanish giants and PSG in the running for the sought-after winger, with Man City, Arsenal and Liverpool having moved on.
That's according to Fabrizio Romano, who says that Diomande has now sorted terms with both European giants and it is now up to one of them to agree a price with RB Leipzig.
Real's latest bid, that was rejected by Leipzig, was €90m plus €10m and the 19-year-old Ivorian while PSG have again been in contact trying to sort a fee.
Bodo/Glimt striker due for medical with Celtic
Bodo/Glimt striker Kasper Hogh will have a medical with Celtic in the next 24 hours, says manager Martin O'Neill.
The Scottish champions have reported agreed a club record fee of £11m with the Norwegian side for the 25-year-old Denmark international.
Hogh will help replace Daizen Maeda, after the fan favourite Japan forward was sold to Premier League new boys Ipswich, and speaking after Celtic's pre-season draw with AC Milan, O'Neill confirmed the move is imminent.
"Yes, I'm hoping that that will happen. I think there's a good chance of it," he said.
"But, until someone's actually signed and sealed, there might be things still up in the air, but it's certainly progressing.
"He will have [a medical] in the next 24 hours, I think."
Rashford set for Old Trafford return
Marcus Rashford looks set to return to Manchester United after his £40m exit clause expired. The winger has been linked to several Premier League clubs, including Arsenal, Chelsea and Tottenham Hotspur, but The I Paper reports that the 28-year-old is now expected to stay at Old Trafford and given the chance to resurrect his career.
Rashford spent last season on loan at Barcelona, rather successfully, but the Catalan giants chose not to pick up the €30m (£26m) option to make the deal permanent and instead signed another Englishman - Anthony Gordon - to play on the left wing for them. United are reportedly hesitant to let Rashford leave permanently to another Premier League club, in case he flourishes with them.