Manchester City face a price hike if they are to sign Enzo Fernandez from Chelsea. City are still interested in signing Fernandez despite missing Chelsea's Friday deadline for offers, but now face paying much more than the £120m the Blues were demanding last week. Chelsea want the midfielder's future to be resolved before their opening game of the season this weekend. City, meanwhile, are to sign 18-year-old midfielder Ayyoub Bouaddi for £85m after selling Ballon d'Or winner Rodri to Barcelona in a deal worth up to £65m
Elsewhere, Manchester United are set to reject an audacious approach from Galatasaray for their captain Bruno Fernandes. The Turkish club are determined to sign a star this summer and are lining up a comprehensive financial package that would have doubled the 31-year-old midfielder's salary, but United's stance is that Fernandes is not for sale. Fernandes has entered the final 12 months of his contract at Old Trafford, but there is an option to extend for another year, and the Portuguese would not be allowed to leave in the week before the season starts.
Bradley Barcola was left out of Paris Saint-Germain's squad for the French Super Cup on Sunday in a boost to Liverpool and Arsenal's chances of signing the France international winger. Barcola was also an unused substitute in PSG's Super Cup win over Aston Villa on Wednesday. The European champions were set to demand £145m for the 23-year-old but Liverpool are prepared to play the long-game as they bid to negotiate a price as Andoni Iraola targets a new winger. Arsenal, meanwhile, are in the market for a marquee attacking signing.
Follow all of the latest news, rumours and done deals below
Todd Boehly open to selling stake in Chelsea
Todd Boehly is open to selling his stake in Chelsea to majority owners Clearlake Capital.
The Financial Times reported on Monday that Chelsea chairman Boehly and director Mark Walter were in talks to sell their 12.8 per cent stakes to Clearlake, who are led by Behdad Eghbali.
Rumours of a rift between Boehly and Eghbali, whose Clearlake owns 61.5 per cent take, first surfaced in 2024 and it was reported the pair had explored how they could buy the other out.
Walter is reportedly also selling the Los Angeles Lakers to former Disney CEO Bob Iger and venture capitalist Josh Kushner for a record-breaking $12.5bn, a year after buying a majority stake.
Hansjorg Wyss also owns a 12.8 per cent stake in Chelsea but reports indicated that the Swiss billionaire's position is unclear. Chelsea declined to comment.
FPL tips 2026/27: 44 players you should consider signing
With tens of millions of players across the world, Fantasy Premier League is back ahead of the new Premier League season, which starts on Friday as defending champions Arsenal kick off against Championship winners Coventry City.
As always, FPL players are tasked with building a title-winning side with a fixed budget of £100m. Within that, players must get the balance right between the expensive premium picks who are likely to top the points tallies at the end of the 38-game season, along with the hidden gems that could make the difference over the campaign.
Man City 'face Enzo Fernandez price hike' after new man City deadline
Manchester City will now have to pay more than £120m if they are to sign Enzo Fernandez from Chelsea this summer, according to the Telegraph.
Chelsea want to resolve Fernandez's future before their opening game of the Premier League season on Monday and although it was reported that the Blues were hopeful he could be reintegrated into Xabi Alonso's squad, he was booed by supporters at Stamford Bridge on Saturday.
Talks are still ongoing with the Argentina international, with Manchester City interested in signing the midfielder after agreeing to sell Rodri to Barcelona. Chelsea had set a deadline of Friday for bids Fernandez, but that passed without City submitting an offer.
Should City return to Chelsea with an offer, they face entering new negotiations for the player and having to pay more than the £120m quoted to them last week.
Manchester United make stance clear on Bruno Fernandes transfer after interest from Galatasaray
Manchester United are adamant Bruno Fernandes is not for sale at any price after Galatasaray showed interest in him.
The Turkish champions are thought to be interested in the 31-year-old but United would reject any offer that came in.
Fernandes is in the last year of his contract, though United have the option to extend it for a further season, but they have no intention of letting him go.
The Portugal international received a huge offer from Saudi Arabian Pro-League club Al-Hilal in the summer of 2025.
And while he spurned it to stay at Old Trafford, he subsequently revealed he was "hurt" that he thought the club "wanted me to leave".
Fernandes nevertheless responded by winning the Footballer of the Year award last season and setting a record by getting 21 Premier League assists in the campaign.
He also won the Sir Matt Busby award for a fifth time as he was voted United's player of the year again as he helped a team who had come 15th in 2025 to finish in the top three.
He was thought to have a clause that allowed foreign clubs to sign him for a fixed fee this summer but it expired last month.
Ranking every Premier League team before the most unpredictable season in years
A new era of the Premier League begins on Friday as defending champions Arsenal kick off what looks to one of the most unpredictable seasons in years.
Pep Guardiola's departure from Manchester City following a decade of dominance coincides with Arsenal's return as defending champions for the first time 22 years. Mikel Arteta is now the longest-serving Premier League manager and the relative stability at the Gunners comes in sharp contract to the upheaval across the top-flight.
Nine Premier League clubs have changed managers over the summer, while Michael Carrick and Roberto De Zerbi begin their first full seasons at Manchester United and Tottenham, respectively. There are many unknowns across the Premier League, with Andoni Iraola taking charge of Liverpool and Xabi Alonso arriving at Chelsea.
Coventry City, Ipswich Town and Hull City were promoted from the Championship last season, replacing the relegated West Ham, Burnley and Wolves, and will hope to take inspiration from a Sunderland who qualified for Europe last term in their first season back in the top-flight.
How does it play out this time? This is our predicted table...
Virgil van Dijk: Liverpool's new-look central defence will take time to gel
Virgil van Dijk accepts it will take time to build a connection with new signings Jeremy Jacquet and Ronald Araujo after Liverpool's central defence received a summer overhaul.
The departure of Ibrahima Konate after an indifferent season in which he played the majority of games alongside Van Dijk in their disappointing Premier League title defence and ongoing fitness issues with Joe Gomez and Giovani Leoni meant the club had to act to improve an area of weakness.
A £60m deal for Jacquet was agreed at the end of the winter transfer window, but he immediately sustained a season-ending injury and so his first appearance for his new club was delayed until Sunday's 2-0 friendly win over Como.
The 21-year-old put in an impressive 45-minute performance, scoring the second goal, before being replaced by former Barcelona captain Araujo, who arrived a week ago in a loan deal which could be made permanent and also looked good in his first outing.
Jacquet is set to start at Newcastle at the weekend and Van Dijk knows, for all their time on the training ground, it is only in matches they will be able to build a proper relationship.
ICYMI: Martin Odegaard ready to get back to his best at Arsenal
Martin Odegaard has described how last season's struggle with injury has made him stronger.
Odegaard lifted the Premier League trophy in May - his first silverware since he joined Arsenal in 2021 - but it was often a difficult campaign on a personal note with knee, shoulder and muscle problems limiting his role.
The Norway midfielder made just 16 league starts and missed the Carabao Cup final loss to Manchester City, a defeat Arsenal avenged on Sunday by winning the Community Shield season curtain-raiser 3-0.
Chelsea outline new Enzo Fernandez deadline
Chelsea want to resolve Enzo Fernandez's future before their opening game of the Premier League season.
Talks are ongoing with the Argentina international, with Manchester City interested in signing the midfielder after agreeing to sell Rodri to Barcelona.
Chelsea had set a deadline of Friday for bids Fernandez, but that passed without City submitting an offer.
Fernandez was then booed by some Chelsea fans as he made his first appearance at Stamford Bridge since the summer.
Chelsea play Fulham at Craven Cottage on Monday, with the transfer window closing the following Tuesday on 1 September.
City have entered "advanced talks" to sign 18-year-old midfielder Ayyoub Bouaddi from Lille for around £85m.
But they are set to sell Tijjani Reijnders for £51m and Enzo Maresca is keen to reunite with Fernandez as he continues City's midfield rebuild.
ICYMI: Manchester United to reject Galatasaray approach for Bruno Fernandes
Galatasaray are preparing an audacious bid to sign Bruno Fernandes but the Manchester United captain is not for sale at any price.
The Turkish club are determined to sign a star this summer, following a busy transfer window for their rivals Fenerbahce and Besiktas, and are lining up a comprehensive financial package for the 31-year-old midfielder.
United's stance is that Fernandes is not for sale. United will return to the Champions League this season after Fernandes broke the record for Premier League assists last campaign.
ICYMI: Liverpool and Arsenal get Bradley Barcola boost as winger left out of PSG squad
Paris Saint-Germain manager Luis Enrique refused to discuss Bradley Barcola's future after the Liverpool and Arsenal target was left out of their squad to play Lens in the French Super Cup last night.
Following the 1-0 defeat, Enrique said: "I'll talk about the situation after the transfer window has passed". Barcola was also an unused substitute in PSG's win over Aston Villa in the European Super Cup on Wednesday.
Ibrahim Mbaye was also absent from the PSG squad against Lens. Liverpool expressed an interest in signing Mbaye earlier this summer, while both Liverpool and Arsenal are hoping to talk PSG down from their asking price.
Liverpool are prepared to pay £100m for the 23-year-old, but PSG have set their asking price at £145m. Liverpool are hopeful that they can continue to negotiate with PSG before the deadline.