Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
There is "a low but growing risk" that Russia would launch a limited military attack against one or several NATO countries that border it, Denmark intelligence has warned
Such attacks could include isolated strikes with long-range weapons like drones or missiles on infrastructure supporting Ukraine, or false-flag operations using Ukrainian-made drones, intelligence service chief Thomas Ahrenkiel said at a press conference.
He said Russia could also deploy a limited number of troops into a NATO border area, potentially under the pretext of protecting Russian minorities.
"The aim is not to take over the country, but to divide NATO," he said.
Meanwhile, Donald Trump is facing backlash after inviting Russian president Vladimir Putin to a December G20 meeting in Miami, for what would be his second US visit since the war began.
"It's clearly, I think, the wrong path to normalise people who are starting wars, who are going against the UN charter, who are killing and giving orders to kill civilians," said the EU's top diplomat, Kaja Kallas, speaking to Sky News.
Russia has invited Kim Jong Un to visit the country, the Tass news agency said
Russia has extended an official invitation to visit the country to North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, a deputy foreign minister has said according to the TASS state news agency.
Moscow and Pyongyang have drawn markedly closer in recent years, with North Korea sending troops to fight alongside Russian forces in Ukraine in 2024 and deepening military cooperation under a mutual defence pact.
US and Indian top diplomats discuss Russia sanctions bill signed by Trump
US secretary of state Marco Rubio and Indian foreign minister S Jaishankar discussed on Wednesday US measures that could be leveled against countries that engage economically with Russia and Iran.
Last week, Trump signed the bill called "Lindsey O Graham Sanctioning Russia and Iran Act of 2026," named after deceased South Carolina Republican US Senator Lindsey Graham.
Rubio and Jaishankar "discussed sanctions that could be leveled against states that engage economically with Russia and Iran," the State Department said in a statement after their meeting in New York.
Jaishankar wrote on X he "reiterated India's interests and concerns with regard to SRIA."
India has previously told Washington that new measures to levy tariffs over the purchase of Russian oil could impact bilateral ties.
Don't weaken sanctions on Russian oligarchs, Zelensky pleads with world leaders - ICYMI
'Low but growing risk" that Russia would launch a limited military attack against one or several NATO countries, Denmark warns
Russia is likely to intensify its hybrid war against the West in the coming months, Denmark's defence intelligence service said in a new threat assessment on Thursday.
Hybrid warfare and sabotage on European soil gained renewed attention after Germany recently blamed Russia for an attempted drone attack at the Leipzig/Halle Airport, prompting European Union members to call for new sanctions against Russia.
Moscow has repeatedly denied any involvement in hybrid warfare, sabotage operations in NATO countries, or plotting any confrontation.
The Russian embassy in Denmark rejected the assessment as unsupported by credible evidence and accused the West, led by Denmark, of driving up tensions over Ukraine.
"Our persistent warnings about the destructiveness of such an approach are being ignored," the embassy said in a written statement.
The defence intelligence service said Russia would carry out more frequent attacks against the West and NATO "with greater consequences for the countries targeted than in the past".
It added that there was "a low but growing risk" that Russia would launch a limited military attack against one or several NATO countries that border it.
"A limited military attack would be a desperate move on Russia's part and, like the intensified hybrid attacks, could potentially take place in the coming months," it said.
Such attacks could include isolated strikes with long-range weapons like drones or missiles on infrastructure supporting Ukraine, or false-flag operations using Ukrainian-made drones, intelligence service chief Thomas Ahrenkiel said at a press conference.
He said Russia could also deploy a limited number of troops into a NATO border area, potentially under the pretext of protecting Russian minorities.
Finnish leader pleads with Musk to help Ukraine hit Russian missile launchers
Alexander Stubb said on Thursday he pleaded with SpaceX owner Elon Musk to expand Starlink satellite internet coverage for Ukraine so it can strike Russian ballistic missile launchers located inside Russian territory.
With winter looming, Ukraine has an acute shortage of air defenses to repel Russian ballistic missiles, and Kyiv officials believe that turning on Starlink over Russian territory would help it target the Russian launchers that fire the missiles.
"That's why ... I plead that Elon Musk would give the Ukrainians the possibility to use Starlink in areas where there are ballistic missile launchers, either in the occupied territory of Ukraine or in Russia for strategic purposes because that would save lives," Stubb said.
The Finnish leader, a staunch ally of Ukraine who also has good relations with US President Donald Trump, made the remark in an interview with Reuters in New York where world leaders have converged for the annual gathering at the United Nations.
President Volodymyr Zelensky used the event to press hard for ceasefires that would cover strikes on targets related to energy infrastructure and vessels in the Black Sea. Russia has given no public indication it wants to see such arrangements.
German minister calls for ceasefire starting around the Black Sea
German foreign minister Johann Wadephul has called for a full and immediate ceasefire in Ukraine, starting in the Black Sea, to safeguard grain and food supplies.
"Ukraine had a very good grain harvest this year. But because of the Russian attacks on Ukrainian ports, it can't be delivered to the world.
"Russia is thereby exacerbating hunger and starvation worldwide," he said in a statement published on Thursday.
Poland suspects Russia behind fire at Starlink satellite station
A fire broke out on Wednesday evening at a ground-based Starlink satellite communications station in central Poland providing connectivity for the region, including Ukraine, deputy prime minister Krzysztof Gawkowski said.
He added that the systems were now operational.
Poland has been on heightened alert for acts of sabotage since Russia's invasion of neighbouring Ukraine in 2022. Russia has repeatedly denied any such action.
"The fire engulfed the power station and the generator; it is clear that this act of sabotage was deliberately designed to disable the station - effectively cutting off the internet connection... and disrupting internet access for various institutions, including the Ukrainian military," he said.
"While everything is operational today, we must recognise -as Prime Minister Tusk recently noted - that this is an element of hybrid warfare."
He added that while it was not established that Russia was responsible for the fire, "many signs suggest this aligns with Russia's new doctrine of attack".
Zelensky tells world leaders that Putin is 'patient zero' for spreading war globally - but Ukraine has a cure
Volodymyr Zelensky looked tired. His delivery was halting. Like the country he leads he can barely comprehend that he is still talking of war into the fifth year of Ukraine's defence against Russia.
He has a new message and a new way to deliver it. Vladimir Putin, he told the assembled world leaders at the United Nations General Assembly in New York, is "patient zero" spreading the infection of war to Africa, Asia, all over the world.
"Putin is always looking for someone who can help him kill more, kill more people for every kilometre of land, take more territory, attack another country instead of simply stopping and running his own country, the Ukrainian president said.
Zelensky signs drone deals with Finland, Australia and other countries
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky says he has signed a "drone deal" with Finland, another in a series of agreements combining Kyiv's technical expertise with other countries' industrial capacity.
"We are always ready to share what has helped us save lives with our closest friends," Mr Zelensky wrote.
When the war began in February 2022, Ukraine had limited experience in drone technology. Kyiv has rapidly developed its expertise and is now able to down drones, many of them designed by Iran.
It has offered its technology to a wide range of countries, many of them in the Middle East, facing Iranian weaponry.
Kyiv has now clinched "drone deals" with 10 countries and has an accord with the European Union.
In his address to the UN General Assembly on Wednesday, Zelensky said a security accord had also been concluded with Australia.
He described the drone deals as "ready-made security formats that we adapt to each specific country and each specific region".
"We are already working with partners in the Gulf, the South Caucasus, and across Europe through drone deals."
Developing drones, he said, allowed countries to control borders, mountain areas and roads "and without them, this would simply be impossible".