Become an Independent member to bookmark this article
Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.
Join today
Already a member? Log in
Former Strictly Come Dancing contestant Wynne Evans has called out his professional partner, Katya Jones, for failing to support him publicly after a string of controversies.
The Welsh opera singer's time on the 2024 series was thrown into chaos after he was spotted engaging in a "silly inside joke" with Jones, in which she could be seen awkwardly moving his hand from her waist during a live episode.
In another moment, Jones was seen avoiding a high-five offered by her celebrity partner - but after rumours of a behind-the-scenes feud, they told viewers it was part of "a running joke".
Evans's troubles deepened when he was dropped by the BBC in May 2025 after apologising for using "inappropriate language" during the launch of the Strictly tour.
He clarified that the word he used while speaking to former EastEnders actor Jamie Borthwick, but acknowledged it was "not an appropriate word for the workplace."
Evans previously said that his behaviour on Strictly was "totally stupid" and that he "paid the ultimate price in terms of my career".
He revealed the severe impact on his mental health, stating, "I went on a dancing show and ended up trying to take my own life, I did end up in hospital, somebody phoned me, rang an ambulance, and luckily for me, I'm here today."
Evans accused the press of hounding him and expressed a wish for "better insight" before joining Strictly. Despite the ordeal, he believes the experience has given him "a greater understanding of my own mental health and where I am in my life", enabling him to help others.
In June, the opera singer announced his return to broadcasting with The Wynne Evans Show, a live weekday internet radio programme.
The current series of Strictly Come Dancing kicked off its live shows on Saturday (26 September). Jones topped the leaderboard with her celebrity partner, social media star John Nellis.
If you are experiencing feelings of distress, or are struggling to cope, you can speak to the Samaritans, in confidence, on 116 123 (UK and ROI), email jo@samaritans.org, or visit the Samaritans website to find details of your nearest branch.
If you are based in the USA, and you or someone you know needs mental health assistance right now, call the National Suicide Prevention Helpline on 1-800-273-TALK (8255). This is a free, confidential crisis hotline that is available to everyone 24 hours a day, seven days a week.