Satellite imagery showed smoke in the area of a crucial oil pipeline in Saudi Arabia, raising fears of another heavy attack by the Houthis on energy infrastructure.
Images verified by Reuters showed smoke in the vicinity of the East-West oil pipeline, as the Houthis captured a strategic island of Perim in the Bab el-Mandeb Strait. The waterway in the Red Sea is key to global oil shipping.
Earlier, two sources from the Saudi-backed, internationally recognised Yemeni government said its forces had withdrawn from Perim and that the Houthis had also taken the mainland Red Sea coastal town of Dhubab, which faces the island.
The developments threaten to bring further chaos for energy exports. The price of oil touched $108 a barrel on Friday for the first time since May after the Houthis captured Yemen's strategic port city of Mokha.
Saudi Arabia, the world's largest oil exporter, has relied on the Red Sea route since the Iran conflict effectively closed Hormuz, through which a fifth of global oil used to flow.
Mokha is around 50 miles from Bab el-Mandeb, a geopolitical chokepoint connecting the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden and through which about 12 per cent of the world's goods are typically shipped.
Lebanon's president makes a rare visit to southern city as fears of Israeli attacks grow
Lebanon's president made a rare visit to a southern city Saturday, close to where Israel captured a strategic hill, amid fears of more Israeli attacks.
President Joseph Aoun's visit to Nabatiyeh came after Israel seized parts of Ali Taher ridge earlier this month, where Israeli officials said they had blown up Hezbollah tunnel networks, despite a June ceasefire between Israel and the Lebanese militant group.
Aoun said the state will follow up on the needs of the residents "so that you stay here."
Trump says Iran war 'will end soon' and Houthi crisis 'will be straightened out'
Donald Trump is speaking to reporters in Ireland while on a non-state visit.
He insists - again - that the war with Iran will end soon and that oil prices will come down thereafter.
Asked whether Iran is responsible for the attack on the Saudi East-West pipeline, Trump says dismissively that "they probably are".
He claims the Houthis called the US and "doesn't want to fight with us". He says they are mostly allowing ships through with one exception - allied Saudi Arabia - and that they will "get that straightened out".
China accused of handing Iran intel for strike on Jordan air base
Chinese 'entities' may have supplied Iran with high-resolution satellite images of a US military base in Jordan ahead of a strike that killed three troops in July, according to a report.
Three soldiers were killed and four injured at the overnight strike at Muwaffaq Salti Air Base on 17 July.
US officials told the Wall Street Journal that the alleged handover of images represented the most clear evidence so far that Chinese support for Iran had had lethal consequences for US forces.
China has repeatedly dismissed Washington's concerns, refusing to acknowledge that any Chinese companies are engaged in such activity, the officials said.
Trump says 'everything will work out just fine' as Red Sea crisis deepens
Donald Trump said on Saturday that everything would "work out just fine" when asked whether he could help move traffic through the Strait of Hormuz in light of fresh concerns about a burgeoning conflict between the Yemeni Houthis and Saudi Arabia.
"Everything will work out just fine," the US president said, speaking in Dublin after meeting Irish President Catherine Connolly.
Iraq closes border crossing with Iran following drone attacks on Saudi Arabia
Iraq ordered the closure of the Shalamcheh border crossing between Iraq and Iran as a precautionary measure after the latest drone attacks on Saudi Arabia, according to a report.
Two security sources told Reuters on Saturday that a wide-scale operation was underway to pursue perpetrators of the attack on Saudi Arabia.
It came after Riyadh on Friday said its vital East-West pipeline was attacked by drones that were launched from Iraq, where Iranian-backed militias operate.
The world's largest crude oil exporter temporarily closed the pipeline after a drone attack. Iraq dismissed a military commander on Saturday in response to the attack.
Users in Houthi-held Yemen tried to develop advanced weapons with AI, Anthropic says
Anthropic says Claude users in northern Yemen, territory controlled by Iran-backed Houthi rebels, tried to use the AI model to develop advanced missiles.
AI is already transforming warfare from Ukraine to Gaza, and its use on a rugged and remote battlefield is likely to increase concerns about its rapid spread.
Anthropic said the users of the accounts, which it blocked after identifying them, did not succeed in "fielding an operational device" but did carry out a failed test of a guided rocket. It said it knows that because the users returned to its Claude chatbot to find out why it failed.
Read the full story:
Brics bloc agrees on joint declaration, sources say
The Brics group of countries has agreed on a joint declaration, which is unlikely to name any country but will condemn unilateral war by any country, four sources told Reuters on Saturday.
The bloc, which includes Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa, Egypt, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Iran and the United Arab Emirates, is holding its annual summit in New Delhi this weekend.
Representatives of the member nations have been engaged on bridging the divide between Iran and the United Arab Emirates, who are on opposite sides of the Gulf conflict, to produce a consensus declaration.
The leaders of the countries are expected to approve the declaration on Saturday, the sources said.
Israel-Lebanon talks in Rome next week postponed, Axios reports
Talks between Israel and Lebanon that were scheduled to take place in Rome next week have been postponed and will occur instead in October, Axios reported on Friday, citing a US official.
Jewish holidays, a Paris conference and UN General Assembly preparations meant participants could not convene in Rome, Axios cited a source as saying. The Lebanese and Israeli ambassadors are due to meet in Washington, according to the post on X.
Iraq closes two border crossings with Iran
Valiollah Hayati, the deputy governor of Iran's southwestern Khuzestan province, said Iraqi officials had announced the closure of the Shalamcheh and Chazabeh crossings.
Hayati urged traders, drivers and travellers not to approach the crossings until further notice. He said relevant authorities would release additional information.
Shalamcheh and Chazabeh are among the main official border crossings between Iran and Iraq.
Iraq dismisses commander over attacks launched at Saudi Arabia
Prime minister Ali al-Zaidi ordered an investigation into the operations command in Maysan province and dismissed its commander after authorities determined that attacks targeting Saudi Arabia were launched from a site in the province, the Iraqi government said in a statement early Saturday.
Saudi Arabia shut down the major, cross-country oil pipeline on Friday, saying it was a "precautionary measure".
The Saudi foreign ministry blamed the attacks on several drones that came from Iraq and, in a statement, said the kingdom would not retaliate to give the Iraqi government "an opportunity to take the necessary measures".
The East-West pipeline has been vital to Saudi Arabia's continued oil exports in the months since the Iran war disrupted shipping in the Strait of Hormuz. According to the International Energy Agency, Saudi oil exports through the Red Sea port at the pipeline's end have more than doubled since the Iran war erupted.
Tehran-backed Iraqi militias have launched attacks on U.S.-linked targets both inside and outside of Iraq since the U.S. and Israel attacked Iran on Feb. 28 and have coordinated with Yemen's Houthi rebels to attack Saudi Arabia.
Crude prices this week soared again above $100 a barrel, giving Tehran more leverage in any talks. Analysts worry that the Houthis' seizure of Yemen's port city of Mokha may create further complications for shipping on the Red Sea and raise oil prices.