Economists have warned taxes will need to rise to fund new policies announced by Andy Burnham in his first days since entering No 10 .
The chancellor, John Healey, may be forced to raise taxes "significantly" to pay for the cost of living promises made by the prime minister, the Resolution Foundation, told the Telegraph.
Mr Burnham has announced a 20 per cent business rate cut for pubs, clubs and live music venues, a VAT cut to electricity bills and capped bus fares to £2 from January. The prime minister has also promised to fix social care and ease the cost of living.
The business rate cuts alone are expected to cost the government around £100m per year.
"Depending on the price tag for all these things, then it would have to be a significantly revenue-raising Budget to pay for some of those big-ticket items," James Smith, the chief economist at the Resolution Foundation said.
Why is Gary Lineker calling on Burnham to tax millionaires?
Gary Lineker and 100 British-based millionaires have written a letter calling on Andy Burnham to tax their wealth more.
The letter, organised by Patriotic Millionaires UK, says: "We want you to tax us. We can afford it. We're not talking about higher taxes on those who get up and go to work for their income every day, but on the very richest whose income is derived from the wealth they hold."
It tells the prime minister that millionaires are a "patriotic bunch" who "love this country and we want it to succeed".
"As we embrace this new road - please consider taxing us properly as our contribution to it. We love this country. It's time for a better Britain; it's time for everyone here to feel Great Britain. It's time to tax us, the super rich," the letter says.
Gary Lineker leads British millionaires telling Burnham: 'We want to pay more tax'
Gary Lineker has joined more than 100 British-based millionaires in calling on Andy Burnham to tax their wealth more, telling the new prime minister: "We can afford it".
On Thursday, a group of over 100 UK-based millionaires, including Lineker, screenwriter Richard Curtis, novelist Val McDermid, and ex-City trader Gary Stevenson signed a letter urging Mr Burnham to tax their wealth.
Burnham wants to protect 'cherished local spaces' with rates cut
Andy Burnham has said he refuses to stand by and watch "cherished local spaces disappear."
Mr Burnham has announced a 20 per cent business rate cut for pubs, clubs and live music venues. But business rate cuts alone are expected to cost the government around £100m per year.
"I won't stand by while these cherished local spaces disappear, replaced by boarded-up windows and 'For Sale' signs," he said in a post on X.
"They're the heart of our communities and it's time we backed them."
Burnham praised for caring about hospitality following rate cuts
Sacha Lord, night time economy advisor, has praised the 20 per cent cut in business rates that will help 32,000 venues.
"Finally, we have a PM who listens and cares about Hospitality," he said in a post on X.
Cuts 'won't make a difference' says soft drinks company founder
Soft drinks company founder says the business rate cut "won't make any material difference."
Steve Perez, founder of soft drinks company Global Brands and an owner of two hotels, told the Today programme: "It's a little bit like the supermarkets putting up the prices and then saying they've reduced them".
Although hotels are not included in the announcement he does see it as a "glimmer of hope that the government gets it". But he would prefer to see a sector-wide cut in VAT, to help businesses invest and employ more people.
Andy Burnham cuts business rates for pubs, clubs and live music venues across England
Andy Burnham has announced plans to slash business rates for pubs, clubs, and live music venues across England, as he continues his policy blitz to cut costs for the public in his first week as prime minister.
The new prime minister announced venues will benefit from a 20 per cent cut in business rates from April next year as he seeks to "bring hope back across the country".
John Healey wants to 'lift pessimism' about the British economy
The Independent's political editor David Maddox reports:
Chancellor John Healey has vowed to "lift pessimism" about the British economy, help business and the City, and "meet our fiscal rules with a buffer against uncertainty".
Speaking at Bloomberg, he said: "I'm just as concerned about the cost of business as I am about the cost of living.
"Tax, energy, supply chain costs, labour. I know businesses large and small have felt really squeezed.
"I will back you as your chancellor, I will back you in financial services, in technology, in retail, in all parts of the economy.
"We cannot do that without you, the wealth creators, the job creators."
Music Venue Trust calls for relief in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
The cut in business rates has been welcomed by the Music Venue Trust, which acts to protect, secure and improve UK grassroots music venues, and called for the same relief to be offered across Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
Chief executive Mark Davyd said: "MVT warmly welcomes this announcement from the government, and its recognition that grassroots music venues are essential to our local communities.
"The 20% additional reduction on Business Rates from April 2027 is an encouraging first step in a range of opportunities available to Andy Burnham's new team to not just protect and secure live music, but begin to restore its central role at the heart of our towns and cities.
"There remain some issues of implementation of previous reliefs, and we will work with colleagues in government to ensure that all grassroots music venues in England are recognised and eligible.
"We call on Senedd, Holyrood, and the Northern Ireland Assembly to swiftly confirm they will match this much needed support through Barnett formula consequentials. Venues in Wales, Scotland and England must be confident of a level playing field of economic conditions for touring across the UK.
"Live music is an ecosystem, and we strongly urge the government to reconsider the limit to the eligibility criteria so that all live music spaces of all sizes qualify, supporting jobs, local economies and communities to access live music."
Minister confirms two of PC Harper's killers qualify for early release this year
The Independent's politics reporter Athena Stavrou reports:
A government minister has confirmed that as it stands, two of PC Harper's killers will qualify for early release from prison in September.
Andy Burnham said he will review the early release scheme policy, after the widow of police officer Andrew Harper said on Wednesday that it is "deplorable" that two of his killers are being considered for early release under the government scheme.
On Thursday, chief secretary to the treasury Emma Reynolds said while she could guarantee the driver of the car in the case is not eligible for early release, she could not comment on the specifics of the other two involved.
Pushed on whether the two men qualify for early release in September, she told LBC: "As currently constituted, that's my understanding."