A family of Palestinian refugees who died after getting into trouble at sea in Shoreham have been named as Hassan El-Khawas, 55, his partner, Zeina Alayn, 37 and their 14-year-old daughter, Sara El-Khawas.
The couple's other young daughter, who has not been named, is currently fighting for her life in hospital after three of her family members died in the water off the Sussex coast.
The embassy confirmed that their father was from the Rashidieh Camp in Lebanon, and that they had been in touch with their relatives.
Several ambulances and two air ambulances were seen near the RNLI station in Shoreham-by-Sea, West Sussex, on Tuesday afternoon.
Police said it is believed the family had travelled down from London to visit Shoreham, and that they had entered the sea for a swim.
A spokesperson for Sussex Police said: "The investigation into the incident remains open, but following review of CCTV footage and initial witness accounts, the current hypothesis is that this was a tragic accident, with no third-party involvement."
The Palestinian Forum in Britain wrote on social media: "The (PFB) extends its deepest condolences to the family of Hossam El-Khawas, his wife and daughter, and to the Palestinian community in Britain, especially the people of Rashidieh Camp, Lebanon.
"May Allah have mercy on them and grant strength and patience to their loved ones. We also pray for the swift recovery of their surviving daughter."
Rashidieh Camp is on the Mediterranean coast in southern Lebanon and is one of the most populous Palestinian refugee camps in the country.
Andy Burnham has warned of the dangers of open water swimming as he called the deaths a "tragedy".
The prime minister said: "The thing I can say today - and there is still, I think, a further heatwave to come in this summer period - is just to remind people about the dangers of open water swimming.
"The coldness, even when it feels hot outside, it can shock people and that can cause the difficulties. So people just need to remember that at all times.
The Times has reported that in recent days, an estimated 20 people had been camping on the beach, including women and children.
A woman called Rita, who saw the family at about 2.45pm on Tuesday, said: "I was sitting in the car reading my paper and I saw them going through the car park. They looked like a nice family who were getting ready to go for a swim. It's awful. There they were and now they're gone."
Joss Loader, who lives nearby and represents Shoreham Beach Residents' Association on Adur District Council, said: "There's just a really strong sense of shock; obviously people are really concerned for the young girl.
"A small tightly knight community with a very deep sense of shock and that sense of disbelief you get after a tragedy because it has come out of nowhere."
Shoreham Beach is a spit of land with water on three sides from the River Adur, the estuary and the sea, and Ms Loader said the "tragic events" happened in the estuary.
"It's school holidays and we have had a wonderful summer so the beaches have been packed with families," she said.
"The weather was quite calm, not as hot as recent days but it was a perfectly normal day.
"People swim from those beaches even in the winter; generally it is considered as safe as the sea can be. You wouldn't be swimming there and think you were taking a risk."
Alan Facer, a fisherman from Hove, told the newspaper: "The wind earlier was south-westerly so usually the waves pick up quite a bit.
"At 3pm, the tide would have been quite high.
"I was thinking the other day that someone is going to get hurt around here."
Shoreham-by-Sea is a coastal town outside of Brighton, and is a popular spot for families and day-trippers heading to the beach.
Water sports are popular from its shingle beach, including paddleboarding and kitesurfing, while parts of the harbour and port areas are used for industrial purposes.
Anna Peacock, 81, who lives near Kingston Beach across the water from Shoreham Fort, said emergency services were on the scene very quickly.
She said: "It was terribly sad to know that just across the road people have lost their lives. People come down to swim, particularly in the summertime and I don't think they realise there's a riptide along here.
"It's very inviting to come to the sea, but the tide could carry you out in seconds, and I don't think people have realised that."
Ms Peacock said she worries that children today are not taught to swim and said people should be warned about the dangers of swimming in the sea.
At the scene, an ambulance could be seen leaving under a police escort with blue lights flashing.
Shoreham RNLI was tasked by HM Coastguard at around 3pm on Tuesday, an RNLI spokesperson said.
The lifeboat station and shop were closed to visitors on Wednesday, but the lifeboat was still on service.
East Worthing and Shoreham MP Tom Rutland said in a statement on Facebook: "I am deeply saddened by the tragic news that three people have died following an incident in the water near Shoreham Fort this afternoon.
"I spoke earlier with Sussex Police and Shoreham RNLI and have been briefed on the response by the emergency services.
"My thoughts are with the family and friends of those who have lost their lives, and I know the whole community here in Shoreham will be hoping and praying for the recovery of the young girl receiving medical treatment in hospital."