Danny Welbeck scored his first Chelsea goal as Xabi Alonso secured his first home victory as manager with a 2-0 win over Luton Town to set up a third-round Carabao Cup clash with rivals Leeds United.
Alonso named a strong side to face the League One outfit, selecting both Cole Palmer and Morgan Rogers, but it was the 36-year-old Welbeck who broke the deadlock early in the second half after Chelsea dominated the first.
The striker guided in Malo Gusto's cross to head in, before Estevao forced the second and Luton defender Hakeem Odoffin turned into his own net. Jamie Gittens hit the post late on after Rogers smacked the crossbar in the first half.
Chelsea's win came amid significant developments off the pitch, however. Manchester City remain in talks to sign Enzo Fernandez after the 25-year-old midfielder was left out of Alonso's squad to face Luton, while the Blues have agreed a £7.5m deal to sign Aston Villa goalkeeper Emiliano Martinez.
Follow live updates from Chelsea v Luton, below
Alonso on Fernandez move: Let's see how things develop
Asked whether he would like to keep Fernandez before the Luton match, Alonso added: "We want to have the best team possible. We know his qualities. He has shown it and we have to wait, but we will think about tomorrow and let's see how things develop."
Scott still a chance
The Independent understands Chelsea are prepared to go back to Bournemouth for midfielder Alex Scott after selling Fernandez. The Cherries have so far shut down any interest, but there's a belief a bid in excess of £80m, and probably closer to £90m, might bring reconsideration.
What Palmer has learnt from Alonso
Speaking to Sky, the Chelsea forward says of his new head coach: "He was a top player himself, so he's telling me little bits, what positions to pick up and especially before the game, to look at the opposition and where we can hurt them."
Enzo Fernandez in talks over £120m Man City move after absence from Chelsea squad
Manchester City remain in talks to sign Enzo Fernandez from Chelsea after the 25-year-old midfielder was left out of Xabi Alonso's side to face Luton in the Carabao Cup.
Chelsea are holding out for a £120m fee for the Argentina international, which would make Fernandez City's record signing after the £116m fee they paid for Elliot Anderson this summer.
Sutton surveys Alonso's start
"Chelsea were always in control, Danny Welbeck with an excellent header for the first goal," the former striker says on BBC 5Live.
"Jack Wilshere will be mightily proud with the effort and the organisation which his team showed. It's another important win for Xabi Alonso, two from two.
"Leeds United will be a tougher test but they weren't really in much danger. They controlled the game and used the bench well. It's been a good start for Alonso.
"No European football for Chelsea so he knows how important it will be for him to try and win a trophy for Chelsea this season and if he can it will be a huge success but he has only just started."
Carabao Cup third round draw
Crystal Palace v Middlesbrough
Manchester United v Brighton
Manchester City v Norwich City
Sunderland v Hull City
Ipswich v Arsenal
Coventry v Aston Villa
Bournemouth v Lincoln
Liverpool v Tottenham
Chelsea v Leeds United
Millwall v Newcastle United
Fleetwood v Sheffield United
Everton v Wolves
Leyton Orient v Bradford City
Reading v Brentford
Peterborough v Barnsley
West Ham v Fulham
Up next
Alonso now turns his attention to Sunday's Premier League meeting at home to Brighton.
Wilshere will prep for Luton's trip to Mansfield.
Palmer named player of the match
Chelsea took 26 attempts on goal this evening.
Palmer struck eight.
He created another five.
Which goes a long way to explaining why he was named player of the match.
Palmer: 'We've had a look at ourselves'
"Last season wasn't good enough. We've had a look at ourselves. There's a new energy coming into the season. We'll keep pushing on. The gaffer has already said every game, every competition, we're there to win it."