Donald Trump's special envoy Steve Witkoff is reportedly "too scared" to travel to Kyiv for peace talks throwing planned negotiations into doubt, according to a report in the Kyiv Independent.
US negotiators are expected to visit Kyiv and Moscow in the coming days as Washington seeks to revive efforts to end Russia's war in Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelensky previously said.
Russia's Tass news agency afterwards said the visit by envoy Steve Witkoff and Trump's son-in-law Jared Kushner was supposed to take place on Saturday and Sunday.
The Kyiv visit has now been thrown into doubt amid claims that Witkoff is concerned about Russian warnings that he should not travel the Ukrainian capital, the Kyiv Independent reported.
"The Russians don't want them to come here to Kyiv, and Witkoff is always sensitive to Russian sentiment," a source told the outlet. "They're being told there that it's dangerous."
The pair were due to arrive in Kyiv by plane, with the outlet previously reporting that Witkoff does not like taking the train to Kyiv.
Zelensky previously said it was "very important" that US negotiators continue to be active in peace talks.
Watch: Zelensky says he receives information about first airlines refusing flights to Russia
Kremlin says possibility of Ukraine peace remains but there is no concrete basis
We've heard from Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov, who said on Friday that the possibility of a Ukraine peace settlement remained, but that there was no concrete basis for it right now.
He declined to confirm if US negotiators Steve Witkoff and Jared Kushner were due to visit Moscow in the coming days.
Asked to comment on reports that the envoys were expected to visit Russia and Ukraine over the weekend for peace negotiations, Peskov said any contacts would be announced when they take place.
WHO warehouse storing Ukrainian medical supplies struck, organisation says
A World Health Organization warehouse storing medical supplies in Ukraine has been struck during an air attack overnight in Kyiv Oblast, the WHO said on Friday.
"Access to the site remains restricted due to heavy smoke and safety concerns, while assessments of possible damage and stock losses are ongoing," WHO spokesperson Christian Lindmeier said.
"No WHO personnel were affected."
Kushner and Witkoff to visit Moscow and Kyiv this weekend - Russian news agency
As we earlier reported, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky said negotiators were expected in Moscow and Kyiv.
We've now heard from Russian news agency Tass, which says negotiators Steve Witkoff and Jared Kushner are set to visit the two countries on Saturday and Sunday, citing a source.
The pair have spearheaded US efforts to broker a Ukraine peace agreement, but have so far not succeeded.
Air Tanzania suspends flights to Moscow after Zelensky warning
Air Tanzania said it was temporarily suspending flights from Dar es Salaam to Moscow from Friday.
It has become the first airline to take this action after Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky warned this week that the skies over Russia were unsafe.
The airline said on Facebook that it took the step after "a routine risk assessment of the operating environment along the route".
Finland investigating surveillance drone near south coast
Finland has said it is investigating whether a surveillance drone on the shore of its south coast has violated the Nordic country's territory.
An investigation launched by the Border Guard authority seeks to determine where, when and how the aircraft entered Finnish territory and how it possibly crossed Finland's border.
Preliminary examination suggests the aircraft is a Geoscan 701 type drone, which is used by both state and civilian actors.
European country's have repeatedly alleged drone incursions related to the Russia-Ukraine war in the past year, but the Border Guard said it could not confirm the drone's origin, operator or purpose at this stage.
The drone was intended for surveying and mapping and did not pose a danger to the public, the defence ministry said on Wednesday.
Germany once cosied up to Putin. Now they are Russia's public enemy number one in Europe
Eighteen years before Russian tanks rolled into Ukraine, the then German chancellor Gerhard Schröder was asked for his opinion on President Vladimir Putin.
"I am thoroughly convinced that the Russian president wants to transform Russia into a democracy and that he is doing so out of a deeply held conviction," he said in 2004. That same year, Putin was re-elected by a landslide in an election widely regarded as a sham.
His comments underlined a spirit of cooperation and friendship that had grown between the two countries since the end of World War Two. Germany's economy hugely benefited from imports of cheap Russian gas, culminating in the construction of the Nord Stream gas pipeline under the Baltic Sea.
That relationship has now hit an all-time low. On Wednesday, the deputy chairman of Russia's Security Council, Dmitry Medvedev, threatened Germany with direct military strikes in response to Berlin's claim that Russia was behind a failed explosive drone attack at Leipzig Airport last month. The drone, which was laden with explosives, failed to detonate near a Ukrainian cargo plane.
Suha Kidwai delves into the relationship between Russia and Germany:
Two police officers killed in Russian attack on Dnipropetrovsk, say Ukrainian authorities
Two police officers have been killed in a Russian attack on the Dnipropetrovsk region, local authorities have said.
Another officer was injured in the drone strike on the Pavlohrad district.
"Two people died . One more person was injured. The enemy attacked 2 districts of the region with drones and artillery more than 10 times," said Oleksandr Hanzha, head of the Dnipropetrovsk regional military administration.
"The enemy targeted the Bohdanivka hromada [administrative area] in the Pavlohrad district.
"A fire broke out and a car was damaged. Two police officers were killed. Another is in hospital in a critical condition."
Russia strikes energy infrastructure in Ukraine's Odesa region, say authorities
Russia attacked energy infrastructure facilities in Ukraine's southern Odesa region overnight, Ukraine's energy ministry said on Friday, warning of possible network restrictions.
Odesa governor Oleh Kiper said earlier that one person had been killed and at least five injured in the attack.
In recent weeks, Russia has been actively attacking the Odesa region, focusing on port and energy infrastructure.
Why has Russia set its sights on Germany?
The motives behind Russia's recent hybrid attacks on Germany are partly strategic, with Moscow seeking to exploit divisions in Germany over continuing support for Kyiv, explains Ian Bond, the deputy director of The Centre for European Reform (CER),
State elections are coming up in Germany where the far-right, pro-Russia party, Alternative for Germany (AfD) are topping the polls.
"With these attacks, it seems like Putin is trying to scare Germans into voting for a party who can show that they won't have a problem with Russia," he said.
Mr Bond said that voters opting for a party sympathetic to the Kremlin was a "puzzle" unique to Germany, that was not replicated in eastern European states.
But Putin's targeting of Germany is not exceptional, cautioned Mr Bond.
Several states and institutions have been subject to the Kremlin's aggression - including Poland and the Baltic states.
"Germany is bearing the brunt of recent attacks, but there is quite a lot of this going on," he said.
"The message of this for the rest of Europe and NATO is that, while Russia may not be strong enough to launch direct attacks, it is doing everything it can to destabilise Europe, and try to scare away support for Ukraine."
Mr Bond warned against potential German appeasement of Putin.
"Each one hopes that if he feeds the crocodile enough, the crocodile will eat him last," Mr Bond quoted. "Here, Putin is hoping that the rest of Europe will believe that if it feeds Ukraine to Russia - it'll be the end of it all."