Arsenal have made a breakthrough in their pursuit of Real Madrid's Vinicius Jr with a transfer for the Brazilian winger now seen as a possibility after his contract talks in Spain have stalled. The Gunners are also targeting Newcastle midfielder Bruno Guimaraes and a report from the The Times says he will have a medical with the club today.
In order to facilitate two huge deals - both would need fees near to or in excess of £100m - Arsenal may need to sell. Christian Norgaard is set for the exit after a single season at the Emirates with Everton is his next destination, it seems. Myles Lewis-Skelly could also be an eye-raising sale with Manchester United exploring their options to bring the defender to Old Trafford as Michael Carrick looks to bolster his squad.
United's aim is for a left-back with Newcastle United's Lewis Hall also in the mix though it may prove more difficult to prize him out of St. James' Park given the sale of Sandro Tonali and, probably, Guimaraes already in this window.
Elsewhere, Chelsea have announced the surprise signing of Danny Welbeck, with Jordan Henderson soon to follow, and Mohamed Salah appears to have a new club, finally, after leaving Liverpool on a free.
Follow all of the latest news, rumours and done deals with our live blog below:
Should Harry Maguire move on?
Former Manchester United striker Louis Saha says it might be time for the centre-back to leave the club.
"It's time to consider if Harry Maguire should move on," Saha said.
"I always come back to those moments where his career was under a lot of pressure, critics were coming from left, right, and center internationally.
"He has done really well to still be in that conversation. He's still a leader and a real asset, able to help us get back into the Champions League as an experienced player. I can still see him having a massive role.
"But in a personal way, looking for another challenge at the end of his career is something I can imagine as well. I do think United is still looking for a centre-back.
"We have difficulty having centre-backs that aren't injured. We need that.
"Look at Arsenal, William Saliba is extremely important, and when he missed a few games, they missed out on winning the title because he wasn't there. This year he's been a rock.
"United needs a rock-solid defence. We need someone who can play three-quarters of the games and help youngsters like (Ayden) Heaven and (Leny) Yoro get better at leadership."
Roberto De Zerbi unsure over Richarlison future
Roberto De Zerbi says he is unsure if Richarlison wants to stay at Tottenham.
"I don't know because I like him as a player and as a guy," De Zerbi said.
"He's unbelievable in terms of attitude and behaviour. But, in the end, we have to respect what he wants to do."
When pressed on whether Richarlison wants to leave, he added: "I don't know. I didn't understand well because sometimes he says he wants to stay, sometimes he wants to leave. We have to speak anyway. There is not any problem. He's a lovely guy."
Wales becomes first nation to withdraw support for Fifa president Gianni Infantino
The Football Association of Wales (FAW) has officially withdrawn its support for Fifa president Gianni Infantino's re-election bid, becoming the first football association to do so.
The decision follows his controversial, bungled attempt to sell off stakes in the World Cup to private investors.
New Newcastle signing has his say
Lukas Hornicek has been speaking about his transfer to Newcastle and what the move means to him.
The Czech international revealed: "The last few days have been an emotional rollercoaster from when I first heard about the move and now I'm so happy to be here.
"It's a brilliant opportunity in a new league, which I'm very excited about.
"From the very first moment I arrived here, I received a fantastic welcome and really felt the warmth of the club. Everyone has been brilliant in helping me settle in.
"I know Newcastle is a huge football city, with 52,000 fans at St. James' Park creating an incredible atmosphere and pushing the team every game. I can't wait to play in front of them."
Vinicius Jr back in Real training
Real Madrid star Vinicius Jr has arrived back for training with the club amid contract talks.
Vini is into the last year of his contract with Real and negotiations are ongoing over a new deal. It has previously been reported that he wants to stay and Real have no desire to sell the winger.
Both parties are confident over signing a new deal but Arsenal are said to be willing to spend heavily on bringing him to the Emirates meaning this one may still have a few complications to come.
Guimaraes to hand in transfer request?
The Sun are reporting that Bruno Guimaraes is returning to Newcastle, following a break after his World Cup campaign, in order to hand in a transfer request and personally get the ball moving on his St. James' Park exit.
Arsenal are the ones hoping to sign the midfielder and it is believed that a medical could be arranged as early as today if a deal between the clubs can be struck.
Enzo Maresca 'perfect' for Man City
Josko Gvardiol has hailed Enzo Maresca as the 'perfect' choice to take the throne at Manchester City.
"The level is that high and he has been chosen with reason as the manager," said Gvardiol.
"I think he has a quality, has some new ideas and also we need to see what we are going to do [with] the style of [play], the football we are going to play and the tactics.
"I think he is a perfect one, but of course, it takes time. It's something totally new, it's not easy to change the manager, so we will take time.
"It's our job to help him as much as possible and also to listen to try to adapt as quick as possible.
"I met him, we spoke a little bit about my injury [and] also how we played, how I played before with Pep, and that's it, more or less."
Mikel Arteta provides update on Arsenal transfer plans
Mikel Arteta has declared Arsenal's ambition to make moves in the transfer market over the next few weeks.
"We expect to have movements in the next few weeks, obviously," said Arteta after his side's 4-1 pre-season win over Girona.
"We want to get better like anybody else, and you can see the transfer market and our opponents... We won't sit still and we are very ambitious with what we are doing.
"The margins are very small. Because we want to get better and the level is going to increase. We need to increase the competition internally. We need to make sure we identify the things that we don't have in the team."
Joao Pedro set for new contract
The Athletic believe that Chelsea may offer Joao Pedro a new contract - despite the Brazilian forward already being tied down until 2032.
That contract will be for improved terms, no doubt, but it does seem strange for the Blues to commit to it with six years still running on the existing deal.
DONE DEAL! Newcastle sign Hornicek
Newcastle United have signed goalkeeper Lukas Hornicek from Braga in a deal worth £25.7m.
The 24-year-old joins on a five-year contract after Newcastle paid his release clause.
It is expected that he will be the first choice goalkeeper this season leaving Nick Pope's future up in the air.