Selena Gomez is being sued over her work on a mental health start-up.
Investors say the actor and musician committed fraud by failing to fulfill duties to build and promote her app.
The plaintiffs invested nearly $1.2 million in Wondermind Global, which was launched in 2021 to help users strengthen their "mental fitness," according to the lawsuit filed in federal court in Delaware.
Investors said they were told the "Only Murders in the Building" star, one of the biggest celebrities on social media with more than 500 million followers, would be actively involved in building the company as head of marketing. They argue that Gomez and other company leaders failed to deliver on promises including creating a mobile app.
"Gomez purported to sign a contract obligating her to perform and then ignored it," the lawsuit said.
"There was no legitimate enterprise in the works, much less a lucrative one," the plaintiffs added, saying that the company failed to meet "even its most basic obligations, such as timely paying its employees and vendors."
The lawsuit argues that the plaintiffs were unaware of the company's troubles until an online news story detailed them in September 2025. Plaintiffs are seeking to recoup their investments and legal fees.
Over the years, the Disney Channel alum has continued to use her platform to speak candidly about mental health.
In 2023 the actor spoke candidly about her well-being during an interview with Wondermind, published on 10 October for World Mental Health Day. According to Gomez, when she started being transparent about her mental health, it had one of the "biggest positive impacts" on her.
"When I decided to be open about my mental health, people began to reach out and share their stories," she said. "Listening and connecting was the biggest gift because you feel less alone."
She added: "I am not going to pretend I have it all figured out and I think it's always going to be a work in progress. You have to learn to make the choices that are best for you."
A representative for Gomez did not immediately respond to a request for comment.