Gironde authorities have warned that they could be fighting raging blazes near Bordeaux for "several weeks or even several months".
The "real challenge is endurance" according to Lieutenant Colonel David Annotel, spokesperson for the National Firefighters Federation of France who told Franceinfo.
He reflected that the 2022 Landiras wildfire was not considered officially extinguished until 2025.
"We're looking at a similar situation. For many weeks and months, crews from all over France will have to continue rotating in."
Bordeaux Airport's hotel zone has been evacuated until further notice as raging wildfires threaten the city, although the airport itself remains operational.
In a statement overnight, the airport said while flights are still operational, no accommodation can be provided at the airport itself, which closes overnight.
It advised travellers to look outside the evacuated areas or at the Parc des Expositions.
Raging wildfires are now just 15km (9 miles) from Bordeaux, the city's mayor Thomas Cazenave said on Sunday.
It is the sixth largest city in France when including both the city proper and surrounding metropolitan area, and is home to over 1.2 million people.
Fire remains 'active and uncontrolled' but 'slowed down' overnight
Madrid authorities have said that wildfires raging near the capital remain "active and uncontrolled".
"The fires in the Community of Madrid during the night have slowed in their advance and have allowed firefighting teams to act on them," read a statement by the government delegation of Spain in the community of Madrid on Monday.
"The fire remains active and uncontrolled. 3 fronts have been identified, with the most active one located north of the San Juan Reservoir.
"Citizens are urged to continue exercising extreme caution and to stay informed about the situation's evolution through official sources."
Watch: Aerial footage shows shocking scale of forest fires outside Bordeaux
Wildfires have hit French economy like a 'clap of thunder', says minister
Wildfires in France have shocked the regional community French finance minister Roland Lescure said on Monday.
"It's like a clap of thunder for an area which could have done without this," Lescure told reporters.
Local blogger Ira Szmuk told The Independent that tourist cancellations will impact many in Bordeaux city.
"People aren't speaking about it yet because we're still in a life-threatening situation but for many people their whole year's revenue depends on these months. The year is over for us the moment you take summer away."
Watch: Distant wildfire almost engulfs home in just 8 minutes in chilling CCTV
Firefighters could be fighting blaze 'for months', warn Gironde authorities
Gironde authorities have warned that they could be fighting raging blazes near Bordeaux for "several weeks or even several months", Lieutenant Colonel David Annotel, spokesperson for the National Firefighters Federation of France told Franceinfo.
He said that the "real challenge is endurance" and reflected that the 2022 Landiras wildfire was not considered officially extinguished until 2025.
"We're looking at a similar situation. For many weeks and months, crews from all over France will have to continue rotating in."
UK preparing for wildfires similar to those that have torn through France and Spain, minister confirms
The government is preparing for wildfires in the UK similar to those that have torn through France and Spain this summer, a minister has confirmed.
Blazes have wrought destruction in mainland Europe this week, with 220,000 forced out of their homes in south-west France and 116,000 evacuated in Spain.
Around 42,000 hectares have been burnt in southwest France, in one of the largest forest fires since the Second World War. Since the start of the year, about 98,000 hectares have been scorched. Meanwhile, in Spain around 70,000 hectares have burned this year.
Asked whether the UK is preparing for similar events, minister for intergovernmental relations Hamish Falconer told Sky News: "Obviously there are wildfires in Scotland as well, and we're in touch with the Scottish government about what support the British government can provide.
Evacuation of Bordeaux 'not on the agenda' says government spokesperson
A complete evacuation of the city of Bordeaux is "not on the agenda" at this time, a government spokesperson told Franceinfo on Monday.
She added that the blaze was "very difficult to anticipate" and that the government "remains extremely cautious" about the "extraordinary fire".
Over the weekend, Bordeaux City Council told Sky News that it was considering a total evacuation of the city as one of the possible options in dealing with the fire.
Rain offers respite in small village outside of Bordeaux
Jérôme Steffe, the mayor of Cestas, a small rural village outside of Bordeaux, has said the situation has approved following rain overnight.
"We're lucky because we had rain during the night and the wind lessened a bit. That did a lot of good, but make no mistake: it's not because the leaves on the trees are damp and the flames have died down in places that there's no longer any risk," he said.
Gironde authorities said that "the situation remained stable overall during the night" but that firefighters continued to battle the blazes.
Firefighters battled throughout the night to keep fires away from Bordeaux
Firefighters battled throughout the night and into Monday morning to tackle raging wildfires threatening the city of Bordeaux.
About 220,000 people have been evacuated in France and more than 75,000 people have been evacuated in Spain with a further 30,000 ordered to shelter in place.
"This is a fire of a size never seen before," said Jerome Steffe, mayor of Cestas, on Monday. Cestas is one of the suburbs that lies just outside the main Bordeaux city area and from where thousands have had to be evacuated from homes and holiday residences.
The blazes, which broke out last week near the Atlantic coast, are now 15 km (10 miles) away from entry points to the main metropolitan area of Bordeaux.
A major risk is that temperatures in Bordeaux are set to rise to 37 degrees Celsius (98.6 degrees Fahrenheit) later this week, according to forecasts from France's weather office.
"It's a race against time before the heatwave returns," added Steffe.