A portrait of James Anderson and Stuart Broad was unveiled in the Lord's pavilion ahead of this Test match, a lasting tribute to England's greatest new-ball partnership sitting among the rest of the great and good of the cricketing fraternity. Ollie Robinson and Jofra Archer will surely not join their pace predecessors in watercolour but on the field, at least, a pair that have endured more than their fair share of struggles since eye-catching arrivals into Test cricket are proving an intoxicating combination.
Strong Sussex, strong England? Neither Robinson nor Archer is necessarily a native Martlet but here was an afternoon that would have been enjoyed on the deckchairs of Hove. Against an overmatched, overawed and overpowered Pakistan, the pair combined for seven wickets to demolish the struggling tourists for just 110 and leave England's victory charge likely only to be postponed until Sunday by the weather. It was not always easy viewing given the gulf between the two teams - only Azan Awais (46), who had lost his opening partner Imam-ul-Haq to a calf injury, provided any sort of rearguard, with Saud Shakeel the only other man of the 10 who batted to reach double figures.
And to think that it was only two Tests ago that Robinson was left out of the England side, an error at the end of the era. He has enjoyed favourable conditions throughout his three matches this summer, but remarkable figures of 13-6-11-4 lowered the seamer's average in 2026 to below nine - he may not have considered himself ready for the Ashes in the winter, but he, and England, must surely wonder what might have been had things been handled differently.
Robinson may reflect that there was more he could have done to preserve and prove his fitness; Archer, finally injury-free for a concerted spell, seems to be relishing this chance. His three wickets could, on another day, have been six or seven on a day his opening burst came at an average of more than 90mph - England are reaping the rewards of careful management and will hope that this is just the start of a second coming. In consort with Gus Atkinson and Josh Tongue, England induced 42.2 per cent false shots, the fourth-highest figure for an innings since CricViz recording began in 2006.
The day began with the lesser parts, on this day at least, of England's pace quartet frustrating Pakistan with the tool of their secondary trade. The tourists might have anticipated a swift conclusion to an innings that had been fortunate to survive the first day but Atkinson and Tongue stitched together a more-than-handy stand of 47, the latter wrestling much of the strike on his way to a Test best of 30*. Atkinson was the last man out with he five short of a half-century, and England 10 short of 300.
It looked a better batting day, but the going underfoot remained tough. With Imam absent, it was Shan Masood that emerged to open alongside Awais, but he did not last long, feathering an edge off a full Archer ball as the seamer cranked the pace up. Touching 94mph, his heat and hostility contrasted wonderfully with the whirring Robinson's control of line and length - and Pakistan could not get away.
"Nah, the speed gun isn't working properly," Archer joked. "I saw some of them as I went back, it was nice to see but I've had times where I've felt better and never really had the speeds to show for it. I don't know who is up in the box working it but thanks, I'll take it."
Tongue and Atkinson kept the pressure on, and the former struck with the last ball before lunch, Shafique done on the drive as Jamie Smith pouched a second behind the stumps. He soon had a second, Babar Azam turned around by one that straightened onto the edge and into the hands of third slip.
It was to prove his last as Robinson and Archer did the rest. Shakeel and Mohammad Rizwan, short of stature, were trapped on their crease and LBW, with Smith showing off his improving glovework up to the stumps, while tailenders Khurram Shahzad and Usman Ali hadn't a hope against a fired-up Archer. Having twice overturned caught behind decisions on review, the gutsy, gritty Awais was disappointed to be bounced out by Robinson just short of 50.
Pakistan had only just managed to avoid the follow-on; small mercy on what is turning into a mightily tough tour. Imam's calf prevented him from batting entirely, and it feels unlikely he will be fit to do so later in the Test. It mattered not, really, that they rallied with the ball, removing Ben Duckett, Jordan Cox, and Joe Root - out LBW for the ninth time in his last 12 innings - before the close.
But the lead is already 261, and at some point Pakistan will have to bat again - and Robinson and Archer will go back to work.