On Wednesday, the King, the Queen, French president Emmanuel Macron and Prime Minister Andy Burnham are scheduled to view the Bayeux Tapestry together in London.
Highlighting warm diplomatic relations between the UK and France, the monarch, Camilla, Mr Macron and Mr Burnham will walk along the full 70-metre masterwork at the British Museum.
They will be accompanied by Brigitte Macron, France's first lady, and Marie-France van Heel, the wife of Mr Burnham.
Serving as a woven record of the Norman conquest, the Tapestry has returned to the UK for the first time in nearly 1,000 years. It stays on loan until September 2027 under a trilateral agreement between Britain, France and the museum.
The party will pause at key sections of the 11th century artwork to hear from curators about historical events, such as Harold Godwinson's coronation and the disputed portrayal of his death via an arrow to the eye at the Battle of Hastings in 1066.
Both the King and Mr Macron will give speeches marking the loan at a reception in the Great Court, attended by British and French representatives and schoolchildren from both nations.
Welcoming the royals and the Macrons will be museum director Nicholas Cullinan and chair, former chancellor George Osborne.
The monarch and president share a warm rapport, with the King hosting the Macrons for a state visit last July. Charles famously rebranded the entente cordiale as the entente "amicale" in a Windsor Castle banquet speech.
Mr Macron is the first European leader to visit the UK since Mr Burnham took office.
The visit indicates Mr Burnham is likely to maintain his predecessor Sir Keir Starmer's policy of a "reset" in UK-EU relations. During a recent visit to Kyiv, Mr Burnham pledged to be "bolder" regarding closer ties, maintaining that "greater co-operation" was required across all areas.
Mr Burnham said: "The return of the Bayeux Tapestry to England is a landmark moment in the history of our two nations, and I want people everywhere in the country to be able to enjoy it."
He added: "As we celebrate our shared heritage, President Macron and I will continue to strengthen the relationship between our two nations."
The Labour leader also said the Bayeux Around Britain programme, which will see the digital exhibition displayed in museums, galleries and castles in all four nations, would "give communities across the UK the opportunity to learn about one of the defining stories of our past".
A live national history lesson on October 14 will teach thousands of schoolchildren about the significance of the tapestry.
Culture Secretary Lisa Nandy said: "This will be the first generation in 1,000 years who will be able to see this unique part of our heritage and we are determined that children from all backgrounds across every part of Britain have the chance to see it. The British Museum has pulled out all the stops to ensure that a generation of British children will remember it for the rest of their lives."
British Museum director Mr Cullinan said the initiative to ensure the exhibition was not confined to London marked "the most ambitious and inclusive programme we or any museum in the UK has ever done".