Australian food authorities have rejected claims that horse meat has been found in food products intended for human consumption.
It came after a report - which cited documents obtained by NSW Greens MP Abigail Boyd, some of which remain confidential - revealed the food regulator has not been transparent enough about food safety breaches.
The report carried by ABC News suggested that some consumers may have unknowingly eaten horse meat sold as beef or lamb.
In a statement released on Tuesday, the New South Wales (NSW) Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD) disputed the allegations.
"The NSW Food Authority has not found horse meat in beef, lamb or any food for human consumption," DPIRD said in its official statement.
"This claim is misleading and not correct."
The department also said it "rejects allegations that horse meat has been found in products for human consumption".
The statement follows an ABC News Four Corners investigation that cited confidential NSW Food Authority documents obtained by Ms Boyd through parliamentary powers.
The documents reportedly revealed a range of food safety issues, including claims that horse meat had been sold as beef or lamb mince, alongside incidents involving mouse fur, metal shavings and other contaminants in food products.
Ms Boyd told the outlet she had reviewed confidential files that could not be publicly released but could be discussed in general terms.
"There were a lot of instances of things being found in food that shouldn't be there. For example, mouse fur," she said.
"There were metal shavings found in bread products ... products that were supposed to be dairy-free, that were not dairy-free, [which] were only caught by accident because somebody happened to put it together after their child or they themselves got sick, not because the company had worked it out."
Ms Boyd even claimed that there were cases of needles being found in food.
"We all walk around thinking that in modern Australia, we have food safety standards and enforcement to back that trust up," Ms Boyd said.
"And what we're seeing now is that trust is probably misplaced.
"You could be eating a minced horse when you think you're eating your mince ... that's pretty shocking for the average person."
However, the NSW department said those claims did not reflect the findings of its investigations.
"The NSW Food Authority conducts random surveillance testing on meat products for species identification," the statement said. "There has been no incident of horse meat being found in products for human consumption."
It noted that horse meat can legally be sold as food if processed in a licensed abattoir, but added that "there are no abattoirs in NSW licensed to process horse meat for human consumption".
The department said the compliance project referred to by Ms Boyd focused on illegal knackeries, which process animals for pet food rather than human consumption.
It said one recent investigation involved an illegal knackery operating in Wagga Wagga.
According to the statement, meat processed at the site "was being used for pet food, predominantly for the greyhound industry".
The operator, Adrian Talbot, was convicted in June of operating an unlicensed knackery and an unlicensed animal food van, the statement said.
He was fined A$12,000 and ordered to pay A$30,000 in costs.
The Independent has reached out to Ms Boyd for comment.
In 2013, a Europe-wide food fraud investigation was launched after DNA testing found undeclared horse meat in products marketed as beef, including burgers and frozen lasagne sold in the UK.