Julian Alvarez missed his third consecutive day of training and will be absent from Atletico Madrid's squad to face Sevilla this weekend, ahead of the deadline for offers from Barcelona and Arsenal. Atletico's chief executive has said Alvarez will "never, ever" be sold to Barcelona, but did not rule out the possibility of the Argentina international joining another club instead before the transfer deadline. The 26-year-old forward is Arsenal's top target and the Gunners continue to monitor the situation ahead of potentially making a late move.
Elsewhere, Liverpool have agreed a £100m fee, with £20m in add-ons, with Paris Saint-Germain to sign Bradley Barcola after the French club lowered their demands for the forward. The Reds also want to sign Ismaila Sarr from Crystal Palace after moving on from Brighton's Yankuba Minteh, but Andoni Iraola refused to guarantee that forward Cody Gakpo will stay, with the Dutchman has attracting interest from Tottenham and Manchester City.
Manchester City remain in talks to sign Enzo Fernandez while Chelsea have agreed a £7.5m deal to sign Aston Villa goalkeeper Emiliano Martinez, following a costly couple of errors from Robert Sanchez in Monday's 3-2 win at Fulham. Chelsea could turn back to Bournemouth's Alex Scott if they sell Fernandez, who was left out of Xabi Alonso's squad to face Luton in the Carabao Cup on Thursday night.
Follow all of the latest news, rumours and done deals below:
More through the door at Ipswich?
Gary O'Neil has insisted Ipswich are not finished in the transfer window after another busy week at the Premier League new boys.
Argentina international and World Cup winner Exequiel Palacios arrived at Portman Road on Thursday in the latest big-money move secured by the Suffolk outfit.
Talks remain ongoing with Aston Vila forward Tammy Abraham, who is yet to make a decision on whether to join on a season-long loan, the Press Association understands but O'Neil is hopeful more can occur in the coming days.
Ahead of Sunday's trip to Manchester United, O'Neil told a press conference: "No, nothing to report on that (Abraham move).
"We're hopefully not finished. We're still trying to do some business. As to who that is or what positions that will be in, there's no update from me.
"We're still working hard to try and improve the group, but my focus now is firmly on the game at the weekend and making sure that we're fully prepared for what is going to be an incredibly tough test."
Sunderland refuse to answer questions amid Jack Grealish links
Sunderland boss Regis Le Bris refused to comment on the future of Jack Grealish after his side was linked to the Man City player.
He was coy about the Black Cats' transfer targets in general as the window nears its close, saying: "We are really well aligned about our targets, what we need to get better as a team. I won't comment on individual positions. I still think that we'll succeed in this transfer window."
Marcus Rashford set to rebuff Fenerbahce interest
Marcus Rashford has been earmarked as Fenerbahce's top transfer target as the window nears its end, but according to The Times, the Manchester United winger is set to rebuff any interest in favour of fighting for his place at Old Trafford.
But as one forward looks set to stay, another could leave with Fiorentina opening talks over a potential loan move for Joshua Zirkzee.
The Italian club are willing to pay a loan fee of £4.3m for the Dutch striker, with United keen for the deal to include an obligation to buy for around £21.5m.
Should Zirkzee leave, funds would be freed up for United to pursue a left-back, with Alejandro Balde on their shortlist.
More movement at Aston Villa? Ibrahim Mbaye fee 'agreed'
Aston Villa's busy summer looks set to continue: David Ornstein of The Athletic reports that Unai Emery's side have reached an "agreement in principle" to sign 18-year-old winger Ibrahim Mbaye from Champions League holders Paris Saint-Germain.
Mbaye was linked to Liverpool earlier in the window and has been left out of PSG's squad for the last three games, along with the outgoing Bradley Barcola. The Athletic report that Villa have reached a €55m (£47m) for the forward.
Meanwhile, Villa target Rafael Leao is set to join Galatasaray from AC Milan. Sky Sports report that Leao has accepted the move after Villa did not match Galatasaray's offer on wages.
Villa have also agreed to sign Nicolas Jackson after the departures of Ollie Watkins and Morgan Rogers, and have signed Johan Manzambi too.
Crystal Palace boss gives updates on Ismaila Sarr amid Liverpool links
Ismaila Sarr will not be involved in Crystal Palace's home match against Manchester City in the Premier League tonight.
That's because the winger has a groin injury, according to new boss Pierre Sage, but it comes while the Senegal international is wanted by Liverpool.
The Independent has reported that the Reds are still pursuing Sarr, despite seeing an initial offer of around £50m rejected by Palace.
Liverpool manager Andoni Iraola wants to bring in three more players before the end of the transfer window, including two who can operate in wide positions.
One of those will be France winger Bradley Barcola, after PSG accepted an offer of £100m plus £20m in potential add-ons for the 23-year-old.
And while Liverpool have moved on from Yankuba Minteh following Brighton's resistance, The Independent understands the club are not yet discouraged from a deal to bring in Sarr.
Michael Carrick gives Carlos Baleba injury update after Man United arrival
Michael Carrick has confirmed that new £70m signing Carlos Baleba will be unable to make his Manchester United debut for around three weeks due to an ankle injury.
Following the summer arrivals of Andrey Santos and Youri Tielemans, the 22-year-old completed his move from Brighton on Tuesday to further bolster the midfield.
United director of football Jason Wilcox praised Baleba as "an elite midfielder with immense potential to develop further", but fans face a wait to see him play.
The Cameroon international arrived with an ankle problem, ruling him out of Sunday's Premier League home fixture against promoted Ipswich and beyond.
"He's got a little ankle issue, so maybe a couple of weeks or so, maybe three weeks," Carrick said.
"We'll see but we knew that before, so it's no major issue but it'll be great to have him back when we can."
David Moyes coy on Jack Grealish's possible return to Everton
David Moyes refused to be drawn on the future of Jack Grealish amid increasing speculation that the Manchester City man could be set to return to Goodison Park.
Grealish has reportedly picked Everton as his preferred option if City decide he is surplus to requirements prior to the closure of the transfer window.
But speaking at his weekly press conference ahead of the trip to Bournemouth, Moyes said: "We are in the recruitment business and we are looking to see if we can bring some players in if possible.
"But there's no guarantee and to name one person would be wrong. Jack's not at our club. He was brilliant for us, a great boy, but not for us to talk about because he's at another club."
Moyes also dismissed speculation over the future of Illiman Ndiaye, who is reportedly a target for City, adding: "We're certainly not in a hurry to sell our best players, that's for sure."
Julian Alvarez to miss Atletico Madrid's trip to Sevilla - but Diego Simeone believes he can return
Julian Alvarez will miss Atletico Madrid's trip to Sevilla this weekend, but Diego Simeone believes he can still have a future at the club despite a breakdown in relations after pushing to join Barcelona.
The forward, who wants to leave the club before the transfer deadline and is wanted by Arsenal, has missed the last three days of training, with Atletico insisting that he has an "illness".
Atletico have said that they will "never, ever" sell Alvarez to LaLiga rivals Barcelona and Simeone wants the Argentina international to remain at the club this season. Arsenal continue to monitor the situation.
"The club has been very clear and firm about what's going to happen," Simeone said on Friday, according to Marca. "I remain in the same position, hoping that from a sporting perspective I can help him continue to be the crucial player he is for us.
"My focus is on Sevilla. Obviously, Julian won't be there, and we have to compete against an opponent that has won two games and has a lot of confidence.
"From the moment he returns to training, I'll do everything I can to make him feel as important as he always has been. In life, everything can be reversed as long as we have our health."
Nottingham Forest still active in the market after securing Delap
Oliver Glasner expects more signings at Nottingham Forest following the arrival of striker Liam Delap.
The 23-year-old arrived from Chelsea for a club-record £45million fee on Thursday, and Glasner plans to make further additions ahead of Tuesday's transfer deadline.
Glasner would not comment on a reported £22million Forest offer for his former Crystal Palace wing-back Daniel Munoz, but the Austrian did admit prospective deals were close to completion.
"I think we will add two players," Glasner said ahead of Saturday's trip to Liverpool and on the back of home league and Carabao Cup defeats to Leeds.
"One we have added, that means we will have at least one more signing. Close deals, quite close to be done, but now from today our focus is on the Liverpool match.
"That is the most important thing in the next 30 hours and then we have three more days to get the deals over the line."
'One more' signing for Tottenham after £300m spend?
Tottenham have spent £300m on new recruits this summer but Roberto De Zerbi believes Spurs could yet sign one more player.
The Independent has reported that Tottenham wanted to sign three attacking players before the deadline, with Spurs adding Savio and Omar Marmoush from Manchester City.
They have also been offered Victor Osimhen from Galatasaray, but his enormous asking price, of around €150m, makes it extremely unlikely, unless there are further sales before the deadline.
"I didn't expect a transfer window like we have done," De Zerbi said. "I think we can do one player more in one specific position.
"Yesterday, we went to dinner with the owners, Johan (Lange, sporting director) and Vinai (Venkatesham, chief executive) and we spoke about this.