Former England forward Wayne Rooney has delivered a brutal verdict on the first World Cup final half-time show.
Fifa extended the interval during the final between Spain and Argentina in New Jersey to allow for the 11-minute spectacle, which featured performances from artists including Madonna, Shakira and Justin Bieber.
The decision resulted in the customary 15-minute half-time break lasting more than 27 minutes.
Rooney, who was at the MetLife Stadium working as a BBC pundit alongside Joe Hart and Micah Richards, was not impressed.
After the trio were asked for their highlights of the show by presenter Gabby Logan, the 40-year-old replied: "I'll be honest, mine was when it finished.
"I like a lot of them artists but I thought it was crap.
"It just didn't get me going and I wanted the football to come back on. I like Burna Boy, I like Bieber, I like Shakira, but that was too flat."
Richards, who picked the performances of Colombian pop star Shakira and Nigerian singer Burna Boy as his highlights, called former international team-mate Rooney "miserable" for his frank assessment.
With the conversation following an advert promoting the BBC, Logan added: "I'll tell you what else you get on the BBC: honest reviews".
Fifa president Gianni Infantino announced plans for the show, which was curated by Coldplay frontman Chris Martin, in March last year.
It included Madonna being driven onto the pitch by Brazil greats Ronaldo and Ronaldinho, while South Korean boy band BTS also performed, in addition to appearances from characters from the Muppets and Sesame Street.
Half-time entertainment has become a major feature of sporting events in the United States, notably during the NFL's Super Bowl.
Speaking on ITV, pundit Roy Keane said: "It was a bit of an anti-climax, but I think the people in the stadium probably enjoyed it more than us.
"But it's always nice to see Shakira."
The half-time show was staged in support of the Fifa Global Citizen Education Fund, an initiative working to raise $100m (£75m) to expand access to education and football for children around the world.
Before the match, a string of stars appeared for the tournament's closing ceremony, including Hollywood actor Tom Cruise, pop star Robbie Williams and US singer Jennifer Hudson.
Pussycat Dolls singer Nicole Scherzinger, Italian singer-songwriter Laura Pausini and streamer IShowSpeed also performed before kick-off, along with Post Malone and rapper Swae Lee.