Four 14-year-old boys have been arrested on suspicion of arson after a "deliberate fire" was set on a mountain in South Wales.
South Wales Police is investigating the fire that was set on the mountain near Pleasant Heights in Porth.
The teenagers have since been bailed under investigation, the force added.
"These incidents put communities at risk, can impact people's health, threaten wildlife, and divert emergency resources away from people who need us," Detective Inspector Steve Jones said in an update on Facebook.
"Deliberately starting fires is a criminal offence.
"If you see suspicious behaviour or have information about deliberate fire-setting, please report it to Crimestoppers by calling 0800 555 111 or the police by calling 101."
In a large area across South Wales, around 100 military personnel from the Queen's Own Gurkha Logistic Regiment, supported by the 22 Engineer Regiment, were deployed to assist in rescue and recovery efforts.
Among their equipment are four water bowsers, each capable of storing and transporting 20,000 litres of water.
Earlier on Friday, Prime Minister Andy Burnham described Britain as "a tinderbox right now" with "37 fires smouldering around the country".
Millions of people in England and Wales received an alert on their mobile devices on Friday evening, warning them of "a very high risk of wildfires nationally".
Mr Burnham said the emergency alert system was triggered at the request of fire and rescue officers.
After the emergency alert was distributed, telling people that they "should not undertake any activity that could start a fire, including disposable barbecues, firepits, garden incinerators or fireworks", Mr Burnham wrote on X: "Please do not light any fires in gardens, the countryside or other open spaces, including parks, moorland and wooded areas.
"Our firefighters and emergency responders are working around the clock in incredibly difficult conditions."
The alert was "the most extensive use" of the UK's mobile phone alert system, Cabinet Office minister Louise Haigh said.
Friday was provisionally a record-breaking 10th day in 2026 when temperatures have exceeded 35C or more, according to the Met Office.
Frittenden, near Ashford in Kent, was among the hottest places, where temperatures reached 35.3C.