Nigella Lawson has opened up about her working relationship with fellow Bake Off judge Paul Hollywood, seeming to further quash rumours of on-set tension between the pair.
The sultry TV chef, 66, is making her judging debut on The Great British Bake Off this week after being drafted in to replace Prue Leith following her exit in January.
Shortly after filming began on the forthcoming series earlier this year, there were reports of friction between Lawson and longtime judge Hollywood. Channel 4 denied any suggestion of a feud between the pair after the MailOnline reported that Lawson was left frustrated by her fellow judge, who allegedly travelled to the show's set in his helicopter.
Now, Lawson has shed more light on her dynamic with Hollywood, revealing that they would regularly poke fun at one another - with the newbie coining a new nickname for her bake expert co-star.
"One of the many lovely things about Paul is that he's good at being teased. I called him 'Professor Precision', then he teased me back and suddenly it all relaxed," she told The Guardian in a new interview. "He's much more playful than he looks on camera.
"He often acts bad cop and does that laser stare but he's always himself, which encourages other people to be themselves, too. We complement each other."
She added that Hollywood often pretends to "nod off" when she won't stop talking about food and that they "hit it off" instantly during an unofficial chemistry test before she was officially made a judge.
"It was lucky that we did get on. Can you imagine if we didn't? I bet Paul would have said so!" she said.
Hollywood was also full of praise for Lawson in the interview, saying that she "fitted in beautifully" with the team and that they've spent time together away from filming "with a couple of dirty martinis or spicy margaritas".
Earlier this month, Lawson addressed the feud rumours, telling The Times: "What will people say of us on the programme? I feel that half will go, 'Oh, there's clearly something going on with them,' and the other half will say, 'Oh, clearly they don't like each other at all.' And I feel like that's fine."
Meanwhile, according to Deadline, Channel 4's director of content strategy Kiran Nataraja made fun of the reports while at the Edinburgh TV Festival in August, saying: "Nigella and Paul are not arguing about helicopters the whole time."
Hosted by Alison Hammond and Noel Fielding, the new series of Bake Off sees 12 new amateur contestants enter the famous tent in a bid to earn the coveted Star Baker title.
The Great British Bake Off returns on Channel 4 on September 22 at 8pm.