Jude Bellingham was involved in an altercation with an Argentina player as tensions boiled over following England's World Cup exit in Atlanta.
England were left devastated by a 2-1 defeat at the semi-final stage after two late goals from Enzo Fernandez and Lautaro Martinez completed a stunning Argentina comeback following Anthony Gordon's 55th-minute opener.
An often ill-tempered game, marked by 19 fouls and no shots on target in a tense first half, ended in outright confrontation between some players as Argentina celebrated victory.
TV footage captured England midfielder Bellingham stood alone on the pitch before shaking hands with the opposition, with Argentina substitute Valentin Barco running nearby and celebrating with his teammates.
At this point footage shows Bellingham approaching the former Strasbourg defender, who did not play at all on Wednesday, and slapping him around the back of the head, with Barco retaliating by shoving him.
Initially Barco's teammate Nico Paz tried to separate the pair before more players from both sides got involved and it developed into an ugly scrap.
Other footage shows Barco, who is reportedly set to join Chelsea, running towards the England dugout after Fernandez's equaliser and appearing to celebrate in front of manager Thomas Tuchel, his staff and the bench, which could explain what angered Bellingham after the final whistle.
Bellingham was seen laughing off aggression by Argentina's Leandro Paredes earlier on as Argentina tried to rile up their opponents on the pitch, with England on the receiving end of several fouls.
The rivalry between the two sides has always had a tense edge to it, heightened by the presence of wider political tensions over the Falkland Islands.
Argentina's players unfurled a supporters' banner at full-time reading "Las Malvinas are Argentine", referring to the Islands, which are a British overseas territory.
The two countries fought a war over the Islands in 1982 after Argentina's government of the time, a far-right military dictatorship, invaded the territory. 907 people were killed before Britain won the war, but the Islands remain a source of tension with Argentina and are frequently referenced in Argentinian football chants. Extra security was deployed in Atlanta around the game as a result of the heightened tension surrounding it.