A man armed with pistols and brass knuckles has been arrested after lunging at a Democratic gubernatorial candidate at a county fair in Ohio.
The incident unfolded on Sunday as Dr Amy Acton, who is running to replace outgoing Republican Governor Mike DeWine, spoke at the Mahoning County Democrat Booth at the Canfield Fair.
The county's Sheriff Jerry Greene identified the attacker as 38-year-old Patrick Havas to CBS News, telling the network that the individual had "aggressively shoved his way through the crowd toward Acton while holding a cell phone up".
Greene confirmed that Havas was armed with two pistols and brass knuckles and noted that he allegedly knocked over two older people on mobility scooters - one of whom fell to the ground.
Addie Bullock, the communications director for Acton's campaign, confirmed the incident in a public statement.
"While attending the Canfield Fair, an armed individual lunged at Dr Acton, injuring multiple people," Bullock said. "Dr Acton and Eric are grateful for the swift and decisive action of law enforcement and are praying for the recovery of those injured."
Bullock added, "This kind of violence has no place in Ohio. Dr Acton will always stand up to the chaos, hate and vitriol that pits us against each other."
Greene told CBS News that Havas has been charged with two counts of misdemeanor assault and one count of disorderly conduct.
Wayne Penny Jr, an Ohio democrat, revealed more about Havas' alleged attack to the network.
"He literally bull-rushed through the crowd, knocked our volunteers down, ran through, pushed and knocked the elderly gentleman over with Parkinson's, and the gentleman hit his head and fell," Penny Jr said.
Journalist Henry J Gomez later shared a picture of Acton helping to one of the injured attendees at Sunday's event.
DeWine, who has endorsed fellow Republican Vivek Ramaswamy in the gubernatorial race, shared his own statement thanking law enforcement for responding to the incident.
"Fran and I are thankful Dr Amy Acton was not hurt, and we send our thoughts to those who were injured," DeWine wrote. "We spoke to Dr Acton this afternoon, and she said to share with Ohioans that she is okay."
The outgoing governor added, "We are grateful for the quick work of the Ohio State Highway Patrol and other law enforcement on the scene at the Canfield Fair today when a man tried to forcefully push himself toward Dr Acton as she was speaking and injured other attendees at the Mahoning County Democratic booth."
The Independent has contacted the Mahoning County Sheriff Office for comment.