Late solace for Somerset after Warwickshire win title
Tanya Aldred
With the champions already crowned at Edgbaston, there was a spoonful of solace for those Somerset fans who had hoped the season's final day would bring a title to Taunton at last.
At a warm County Ground with Surrey fielding in sunhats, Tom Abell completed his first triple hundred, an epic of 30 fours, eight sixes, 402 balls and nearly nine hours of batting. He became the eighth Somerset cricketer to tuck one under his arm. When Abell was finally out for 307, aiming for the rope, he was the second highest scorer in the 2026 summer with 1,287 runs - just one short of Nottinghamshire's Joe Clarke.
With a monster total of 731 under their belts, and a lead of 309, there was hope of a last-day win. And when Surrey lost four quick wickets, including Dom Sibley nudging to slip, it seemed possible, but Ben Foakes and Mahipal Lomror calmed the waters. Wicketkeeper James Rew took off his gloves to send down the final over of the season, some lollipop slow left-arm. Handshakes and wistful smiles followed, Somerset bridesmaids for the seventh time this century.
"I don't think there's a reason why we can't get over the line other than it is a bloody difficult competition to win," said the Somerset, captain Lewis Gregory. "We can look forward to next season with great confidence. The support we get is fantastic and this is a wonderful place to play cricket."
At Old Trafford, bad light kept the ground staff busy. Lancashire passed 300 for the first time since April and Josh Bohannon's 190 not out was the club's highest score of the season. Durham, runaway winners of Division Two, jumped in the coach home to prepare for a summer back with the big boys. For Lancashire, who finish 17th for the first time in their history, the winter's aim is more prosaic: to rediscover their mojo.
Only 21 balls were possible at Sophia Gardens, struggling Essex safe barring a successful appeal by Leicestershire over their points deduction. And with that, the season slipped into sepia.
Puddles sit on the Old Trafford concourse, the stands are empty. Winter awaits.
Thank you for reading, and for joining in below the line over an intriguing season, if the warmest on record. Thanks also to the players who make it all possible, their highs and their lows. A delicious glass of a favourite tipple to our worthy winners, Warwickshire, and to Kent and Durham too.
May the lengthening evenings treat you well. Till April 2nd, adieu.
And then there were none. Tom Abell leads Somerset off, after James Rew bowls the final over of the season. Hugs and handshakes and smiles, despite it all.
Taunton:Somerset 731 DRAW with Surrey 422 and 127-5
While we wait for events at Taunton to drift to a close, a quiet goodbye to my uncle Robin, who loved cricket with all his eccentric heart but didn't quite get to see the season through. To everyone else who is finishing the summer without a beloved friend or family member, a big hug.
Everyone agrees to call it a day. Some steel at last from Lancs, who finish second from bottom, 36 points behind next-best Derbyshire. Durham roar up to play with the big boys, with a lead of 47 points over next best Kent.
Old Trafford:Lancashire 397-6 DRAW with Durham 493
Glamorgan's head coach Richard Dawson: "It's been a long six weeks so the whole build up to this week has been great to say thank you to those playing their last game (Colin Ingram, Chris Cooke and Billy Root) I'm sure there'll be some emotions around.
"(Staying up) is the main thing. We've competed across the season with some really exciting games of cricket, found out about and developed a lot of players under different circumstances in Division One against some quality opposition so it's been a different challenge, physically. We'll look where we've done well, where we can improve and what additions we can make."
With the groundstaff sitting on the covers, it's looking a bit like we've seen our final ball at Old Trafford, a back foot defensive by George Balderson into the offside. They are, though, back on at Taunton, where a sunlit Jack Leach is wheeling in.
Hat tips to the bear-like Tom Norton on his first-class debut for Glamorgan (James Rew, Tom Lammonby, Archie Vaughan) and Henry Crocombe twice, and in successive games (Craig Overton, Migael Pretorius, Jack Leach) and (Simon Harmer, Zaman Akhter, Shane Snater).
The covers are comnig on now at OT, but they're playing at Taunton, where Surrey have lost another wicket, Rory Burns dollying a catch into the giant hands of Craig Overton at slip. Surrey 68 for four.
Chris Silverwood on George Bell: "I can't speak highly enough of him"
A big uptick for Bell from Essex's DOC."He's been really good since he's come in; he's great in the dressing room, proved he's a really good player and I can't speak highly enough of him for what he's done or us since coming in. I think he's put his best foot forwards and he'll be someone I'll be having conversations with, I think he's fit the bill very well."
Thirteen cricketers drift slowly from the field. Bohannon, 190 not out, raises his bat as he's clapped off by his teammates. But the single souls sitting alone in the stands remain.
Sophia Gardens:Glamorgan 505 DRAW with Essex 129 and 351-6
Glamorgan 13 pts, Essex 9 pts.
Glamorgan will finish sixth, a very respectable return to Division One. Essex survive a terrible end to the season to finish 8th, 25 points clear of Leicestershire, but won't hang out the bunting until the result of their relegation rivals' appeal against the pitch sanction which deducted 27 points.
"Fair play to George Bell," writes my Guardian colleague and fed-up Lancs fan Will Unwin. "He couldn't buy a run in the seconds, let alone the firsts, at Lancs, but has a 50 in each game he's played for Essex. I wouldn't blame him if he made a permanent move."
There is a bit of a wicket-keeping swap-shop going on at the moment, so watch this space.
Parky, the other one, is turning his arm over from the Jimmy Anderson end. Lancashire have passed 300 for the first time since April at Chester le Street. And they're about to restart at Sophia Gardens.
"I would imagine that many of the Essex partnership records against each county are held by Gooch and McEwen, who seemed to score huge numbers of runs in the 1980s.
"I do recall one match I attended, a JPL 40-over match, in which Gooch scored 175 and Essex 310 in 40 overs, both of which I think were records at the time. Gooch may well have gone on to make 200 had Pringle not run him out. This was against Glamorgan at Southchurch Park, Southend, the very same ground where the 1948 Australians hit 721 in a day. Sadly, the Southend Council recently saw fit to demolish the old pavilion there."
On the stroke of lunch, Ollie Pope gloves (?) a catch to short leg and is furious either with himself or the decision, throwing his bat in the air and catching it as he stalks away. They take lunch with Surrey 52 for three.
Gutted to hear that I missed Scott Read's partner's home-made ginger cake this morning, that'll teach me for procrastinating at home. But Paul Edwards has just given me a lovely end of season present - Ann Wroe's Six Facets of Light.
And we're taking an early lunch here at OT, with the hope of restarting at 12.45.
"Abell, in partnership with Lammonby and Pretorius, has set all-time Somerset records for the 4th and 9th wickets in the same innings - astonishing when you consider Somerset have been playing since 1882.
"Has anybody, or for that matter any team, set two new partnership records in the same innings or even the same match before ?
Have a vague memory of Glamorgan, with Northeast and Cooke involved, coming close a few years back, but can't pin it down, and you'd guess Durham might also have done it in their early days with records much more attainable. But there's probably somebody out there - Gary Naylor perhaps ? - who knows the answer...."
The 18 county scorers run a competition each year and an actual wooden spoon gets presented to the bottom club by the previous owners. We think the handover happened at Canterbury this week, where Kent passed over safekeeping to Gloucestershire.
Lancashire will finish 17th for the first time this season, though they have finished 16th in a 17-team competition five times: 1962, 1976, 1977, 1981 and 1984. The annual awards dinner has been cancelled for this year.
Caught at long on, aiming for the rope, and finishes one run short of Joe Clarke in the highest run-scorers of the year league. Handshakes from Pope and Worrall as he walks off with no fuss.
Somerset, 731 all out, have a first-innings lead of 301. Do Surrey have one last collapse in them?
A standing ovation for Migael Pretorius, as he is lbw having an ugly slug across the line to Dan Worrall. Somerset decide that 727 for nine is not enough and Jack Leach comes out.
Abell becomes the eighth Somerset cricketer to make 300 in an innings -after Justin Langer (twice), Tom Banton( last year), Viv Richards, Jimmy Cook, Graeme Smith, Harold Gimblett and James Hildreth.
At a warm Taunton, where Surrey are still fielding in sunhats, some succour for Somerset fans. A first triple century for Tom Abell, 30 fours, eight sixes, 402 balls, and nearly nine hours of batting. Bravo!
Good morning for one final time this season and welcome to the morning after the day before. We have our Champions, all hail the mighty Bears, our promoted clubs, Kent and Durham, and our sad duo bound for Division Two, Hampshire and Leicestershire.
The Manchester sky is slate, the air sea-spray damp but, like my stoical geraniums, there's just about enough life for one more day.
Three games plod on, a slow draw at Old Trafford, a high-scoring not-this-year goodbye at Taunton and a more intriguing match at Sophia Gardens where great escapees Essex have made a better fist of their second innings.
We'll be keeping an eye on all those, but also looking back over the summer, to the hat-tricks, the hundreds, the hiccups and the howlers.