The Australian rider Maeve Plouffe has said she was nearly hit by a non-race car during the opening stage of the Tour of Britain Women.
With cycling still coming to terms with the death at the Volta a Portugal of the 19-year-old British rider Finlay Tarling, killed last week in a collision with a vehicle that had entered the course, Plouffe said the incident occurred as she was chasing the peloton after a puncture on Wednesday.
"While the race convoy was still in sight, and I was less than two minutes down, there were cars from the general public coming at me from all directions, including one that nearly hit me on a roundabout," said the 27-year-old, who rides for O'Shea Red Chilli Bikes.
"Later on, the moto escort was wonderful and I felt much safer. But considering the recent devastating events in our cycling community, it's scary to see situations like this, when we know that this can have horrific consequences, especially so soon after suffering such a tragedy."
Jonathan Day, the events director of British Cycling Ventures - which organises the Tour of Britain Women - issued a statement to the BBC. "We note Maeve Plouffe's comments about her experience during yesterday's race, and we're taking these extremely seriously," it read. "Rider safety is paramount and will always be treated as a priority in our planning and how we operate any race.
"We're reviewing what happened with Maeve and her team O'Shea Red Chilli Bikes with the seriousness and empathy these comments demand."
Lorena Wiebes sprinted to victory on a rain-affected second stage on Thursday, after the race was neutralised in the middle of the stage for nearly an hour following an unrelated road traffic accident ahead of the peloton. The Dutch rider also won the opening stage of the race.
Meanwhile Josh Tarling, the older brother of Finlay, will ride in the Vuelta a España, which begins on Saturday. The 22-year-old, who also rode in the Tour de France this summer, was confirmed as a member of the team by Netcompany-Ineos on Thursday.
His mother, Dawn, posted on Instagram: "He has chosen to do so in honour of his brother Fin, with the full support of his family, surrounded by a team who have been incredibly supportive of whatever decision he made. I could not have wished for two boys who were closer growing up and into adulthood we have watched with pride as Joshua has been the most loving and supportive big brother to Fin. Following this devastating news he has been an incredible strength for us all.
"Finlay was so incredibly proud of his big brother, and would be watching nose to the TV and shouting as he competed. So it is right that Josh honours that love and pride by doing what Fin always loved watching him do."