Hollywood loves a ticking clock - especially when there's a delivery involved. For decades, dangerous cargo has been entrusted to certain types of action hero: spies, soldiers, hitmen, Jason Statham.
Lately, however, Hollywood seems interested in a different kind of hero - not to mention a different kind of cargo. Forget your nuclear launch codes, stolen diamonds and mysterious briefcases, for human organs are the new MacGuffins du jour, and the medical professionals charged with getting them to the ICU have become unlikely action heroes.
Take Runner, directed by Scott Waugh, which stars Alan "Reacher" Ritchson as a delivery driver caught in a race against time, and Owen Wilson as an organ courier carrying a liver with a life-or-death deadline. "If she doesn't get this today," Wilson says of the girl awaiting the transplant, "she's not going to make it."
It's action movie gold. And using an organ as a plot device is smart because suspense is built into the biology: it's a ticking clock in a cooler. It also unlocks a whole new melange of medical action scenarios: ambulance car chases, surgical scissor knife-fights, hospital shootouts. (Runner, naturally, has the full bloody bingo card.)
Co-writer Miles Hubley says he and writing partner Tommy White wanted "a device that wasn't just about money", adding: "Neither of us had ever seen a movie where the precious cargo everyone wants was a fragile, life-saving piece of tissue."
Waugh agrees: an organ gives the film "emotional urgency". "It's the idea of a protagonist being driven not by revenge or saving the world, but simply by an obligation to deliver something on time," he says. "You've got a deadline and someone whose life depends on you arriving."
Films such as bike-courier thriller Premium Rush and the Safdie brothers' Uncut Gems have set pulses racing using similar time-sensitive tactics, while Statham's The Transporter built a whole franchise from the idea of a courier up against it. But the medical slant ups the ante even further: organs make the stakes more visceral, more personal.
Crank 2: High Voltage understood this. Also starring Statham, it took the organ-chase motif one step further: his character was tasked with tracking down his own stolen heart. Repo Men flipped the script again, with Jude Law on the run to avoid having his artificial heart reclaimed. Organ drama is a rich vein, as it were.
But making the medical couriers the good guys is a new twist for 2026. Usually, characters in the organ game are on the shady side, whether in dramas such as Dirty Pretty Things or full-blown horror movies like The Harvest. A new horror, out a week after Runner, transplants this trope, giving the Resident Evil franchise a new protagonist: Austin Abrams' medical courier.
"This could be some eight-year-old boy's heart or someone's mom's brain," Abrams says in the film. But it's also more than that. He's carrying what everyone else is losing - their hope and humanity - in a medical bag. In fact, so important is this particular MacGuffin that US cinema chain Regal has turned it into a novelty popcorn bucket, fake bloodstains and all.
But why now? Why are medical couriers suddenly getting their action-hero moment? Perhaps it's the pandemic, and we're finally giving frontline workers their due. Of course you could go toe-to-toe with the cartel or endure an apocalyptic mutant zombie virus - you fought off Covid! Sure, it's not much of a thank you, but getting the baddie-busting big-screen treatment beats 50% off at Pret and the odd round of applause.
Hubley, too, says he wanted "grounded heroes, who you could imagine bumping into at the grocery store". And an organ courier brings another dimension to that everyman appeal. "In a world with so much abstract digital noise, there's something about how physical, vital and undeniably real an organ is. It's a living thing that can't be copied, faked or altered. It decays. It can't be sent over email, or stored on a hard drive. It's profoundly human."
Next year, Heartless will put another organ in the delivery bag. Jason Isaacs stars, while The Transporter Refuelled's Camille Delamarre directs. Delamarre, too, sees a post-pandemic connection. "We're more conscious of how fragile and irreplaceable the human body is," says the director. "For me, an organ is the ultimate cargo because it's not really cargo at all: it's someone's life. With a heart, you don't need to explain the danger. Everyone in the cinema has one beating inside them."
And then there's the symbolism. "A heart works on two levels. It's literally keeping someone alive, but it's also the universal symbol of life, love and mortality. You immediately understand why it matters," he adds.
That's not to say Runner's liver doesn't land. Nor does the spoiler lurking in Resident Evil's medical bag. The human body, after all, has plenty of organs left for Hollywood to parcel out. And who wouldn't want to watch Tom Cruise fly a couple of kidneys through a tornado, or Statham hotfoot it across London with a bag full of gallbladders? Heartless may tell us whether this is a passing fad or a new action-movie staple, but if Hollywood's latest organ harvest is anything to go by, the most compelling clock doesn't tick any more - it beats.