Rangers racked up a second win over Celtic in eight days as boos rung around an all-green Parkhead following a 1-0 defeat by Derek McInnes's men.
Celtic's 74-year-old boss Martin O'Neill went into the game under the spotlight after two successive losses, including a bruising 3-0 Premier Sports Cup clash with the Gers at Ibrox last Sunday.
To silence a stadium populated with home fans only, Rangers striker Ryan Naderi opened the scoring in the 33rd minute and it was enough for another huge victory for McInnes's side, who will feel they should have added to that goal after the break.
It was a first Premiership defeat of the season for the home side, who are now just two points ahead of their Old Firm rivals at the top of the table going into the international break with more pressure on O'Neill.
RN: ""I'm so, so, so happy. I'm happy for the team, we deserve this. It's unbelievable. I'm honest. I was a bit lucky to be in the right place but that's what you have to do as a striker, I was there. "
OM: "We also spend a lot of time together, even, like, outside training, we go out together, drink coffee, you know, I feel like we're family, you know, we spend more time together, we understand each other more. And, you know, that gives us a reason to keep on fighting for one another."
That was as comprehensive a win as a 1-0 scoreline can be. Celtic were poor, though so much credit should go to an organised, determined Rangers. A terrible week for Celtic just got worse.
90+3 min: Celtic can't get the ball off Rangers to find that last chance. They will have to go long. Their advance is slow, Hassan's cross is decent but Mheuka can't get to it.
90+2 min: It's frantic, plenty of collisions in midfield. Rangers show such determination in the tackle, and Finlay Curtis is fouled by a foolish Bauer as time ticks on.
86 min: Forrest's shot is deflected after Trusty keeps the ball alive from a corner. Tounekti's cross for the next corner is decent but Rangers clear, and Sterling comes on to deny Forrest. He has been man of the match. Scales meanwhile, has lost his boot.
85 min: Some Celtic pressure. Hassan's cross cannot find Scales. Rangers clear, with no little anxiety. Hassan, at least, has looked capable of creating something.
81 min: Scales' pump down the wing reflects the lack of ideas from Celtic. Tounekti's cross in is headed away by the improving Fernandez. Hassan's cross in, aimed for Hogh, evades everyone. Martin O'Neill is not happy about that.
80 min: It's still all Rangers, Celtic look tired from their midweek punishment from Ferencvaros. Raskin, who has played well, feints and dips a chip wide. Are you allowed to enjoy playing in an Old Firm game like Rangers are?
77 min: Curtis, the regular sub for Rangers and quite the prospect, wins time by winning a file. Roy Keane is pictured in the crowd. His former club are struggling here.
76 min: Tounekti, on for just seconds, was booked for some kind of stramash during that Rangers goal. He was booked for protesting it was a hand. Which it was. No, me neither.
Naderi's hard running wins a corner. Curtis will take, and the ball comes out to Makhanya, who improvises and looks to volley in. But...did he use his hand?
67 min: Forrest is robbed by a combo of Sterling and Gassama before Naderi comes back to rob McGregor, who wanted far too much time. There are boos from the home fans.
60 min: Feels like Celtic are way off this but somehow still in the game. Rangers need another goal. They almost get it when Naderi escapes through another of those gaps, and plays the ball to Kelsy, who cannot quite slide to it. That was simple stuff.
58 min: Kim fouls Scales and is booked for the concession of a free-kick. Tierney slams in a curving ball that Rangers manage to get clear. The corner is claimed by Pandur after a couple of second balls bounce around the Rangers box.
54 min: Another Rangers chance, Kim finding his way into those great gaps in Celtic's midfield and firing wide. There was nobody near him; Celtic are way off it here.
53 min: Two Rangers chances, Sinisalo making a meal of a shot from Penrice, and then Sterling whipping over a ball. There's not much calm in that Celtic defence.
52 min:Rangers pushing on, pressing high, Penrice is leading the press. They can't find the key pass, Carter-Vickers playing an errant ball. Duran has been withdrawn from his battle with Fernandez, with Hogh to attempt the rough stuff.
50 min: Some respite for Rangers, Penrice taking his time over a throw-in; they're trying to take a beat, and McInnes is carrying out a rebuild of his team from the sidelines.
48 min: Derek McInnes has a pen in hand, and then starts chewing on it. Bad habit, that. Celtic's switch offers something for him to work on. They have started with intention and some O'Neil invective to think on, doubtless.
46 min: A second-half sub, with Kasper Hogh replacing Luke McCowan, who had struggled, for Celtic. Celtic score almost immediately as Pandur makes an amazing save from Colby Donovan.
Rangers, like last week, by far the better team. They might be leading 2-0 had Gassama's shot been an inch lower than the bar. Their goal owed much to Rangers being quicker to the ball, while Celtic have been sluggish.
45 min: Celtic just cannot piece it together, Tierney slipping over the ball when it was there to be hit. Rangers break again, Raskin's ball a beauty and Neil, on the charge, unlucky with his shot.
41 min: Naderi, full of confidence after his goal, takes the ball down with a gossamer touch but is allowed to do so by a snoozing Trusty. It comes to nothing but Celtic have been way off it.
39 min: McGregor, in a quarter-back role, picks up the ball, and finds little movement ahead of him. That's greeted by disquiet in the crowd. Celtic look confused, while Rangers have far more clarity in their play.
38 min: The lack of away fans has lent this occasion a hush, with home fans given nothing to react to, Celtic fans now gripped by anxiety as their team misfires. The O'Neill redux has not worked.
36 min: Ooof, so close to 2-0, Gassama hits the woodwork after escaping towards Kim's pass. Carter-Vickers clears in panic. Rangers showing so much more quality in attack at the moment.
34 min: The choice of Sinisalo over Sam Johnstone has had ramifications, even allowing for Johnstone's struggles last week. Derek McInnes made sure to enjoy that goal. Celtic are going for win 175.
29 min: Rangers' turn to build a head of steam? They're working hard, chasing hard in the midday sun but almost fall prey to a fast break, Nygren playing in Tierney, who unleashes and fires just wide of a grateful Pandur.
27 min: Penrice presses down on Sinisalo. No space offered, and eventually Gassama gets away again, and lays the ball square to Neil, whose shot is deflected into the Celtic keeper's hands. Gassama has the beating of Donovan.
25 min: Neither team have created what you might term a clear-cut chance. Though that's as you might expect. Duran spins Fernandez again, and it takes a Raskin foul to stop the Celtic forward.