That's it from us today. Congratulations to England and commiserations to Ireland. Thanks for tuning in, we'll be back to bring you the OBO of the final England v Pakistan Test from Edgbaston on Wednesday.
England captain Charlie Dean has surely shown this summer that she is the heir apparent to Nat Sciver-Brunt:
The way the girls went about it was brilliant. It was a tricky surface to bat on at the start. We were also clinical with the ball. It was a really good day.
To bat first today and get a decent total on the board was good and Sophia Dunkley was phenomenal. We left a few runs out there to be honest. But to come back and start with how we did with the ball was brilliant.
The way the girls have gone about it, they have shown real maturity. Now we are just looking to extend that even further. It's really exciting times and looking forward to the future."
I feel like every game, I am growing (as captain). The girls have been very supportive and credit to them for listening to what I've to say. Also the staff. A lot of work goes into planning and that makes my job easier."
Throughout this series we've shown real positives with the bat and ball, just in different games. I think we did really well with the ball today. Definitely positives to take from this series.
Every series against these top quality players they'll learn. A good build into the winter. These series are so valuable. Playing cricket is great, the more series we can have the better."
Sophie Dunkley is player of the match, series and summer!
It was great to get the series win today. It was a little bit tricky and slow at the start.
Maia Bouchier was great at the other end. The longer you batted, the easier it got. It was nice to get through that period and then see us home.
It is important to be positive with the bat. If we can get on top at the start, we can continue playing that way."
It is just about staying the present. I am enjoying it. It's nice to be back at the top of the order in ODI cricket. I love opening in T20 cricket and also playing ODI cricket. It's a big summer with the Ashes next year and it is one of my goals to stay at the top of the order."
A lovely moment as both sides give Arlene Kelly a guard of honour with the sun casting shadows of the cathedral across New Road. She walks through bashfully, a class act to the end.
That's it! England take the series 3-0 as Lauren Filer splats the stumps for the second ball in a row! The first was off a free hit so didn't count but she bowled a carbon copy with the next. Ireland lost their last five wickets for ten runs in 21 balls but had been going nowhere all chase, England were under no pressure at all and can celebrate a comprehensive series win.
WICKET! Arlene Kelly c MacDonald-Gay b Dean 2 (Ireland 171-7)
That is the end though. Kelly plinks Dean to mid off and that's the final act of her international career. She shrugs her shoulders and walks off to a nice hand from the New Road crowd.
41st over: Ireland 168-6 (Paul 21, Kelly 1) Arlene Kelly arrives in the middle for her final act as an international cricketer and she gets off the mark with a single into the off. No ducks in the final act here thanks very much.
40th over: Ireland 165-5 (Paul 20, Little 13) Five off Dean. Ireland aren't going anywhere and don't look as if they are even going to chance their arm. It's been the story of their innings.
38th over: Ireland 156-5 (Paul 15, Little 9) Dean back on, rattles through her fifth over for the cost of five runs. Corteen-Coleman is coming on for her second spell.
37th over: Ireland 151-5 (Paul 11, Little 8) That's more like it! Some intent from Little who clears the ropes with a drive over long off for SIX. The boundary hitting has been a big difference between the two sides.
35th over: Ireland 137-5 (Paul 8, Little 0) Macdonald-Gay nearly pockets a maiden but Paul has other ideas. playing a dinky reverse ramp with aplomb to get four off the last ball.
33rd over: Ireland 129-4 (Prendergast 24, Paul 1) The left handed Leah Paul joins Prendergast, two singles at the end of the over. Ireland in all sorts.
32nd over: Ireland 127-3 (Prendergast 24, Stokell 7) Stop press! Orla Prendergast opens the shoulders and hits a SIX off Mady Villiers. Over long off, finally some aggressive intent from Ireland - that's just their ninth boundary of the innings. More of that please!
31st over: Ireland 117-3 (Prendergast 20, Stokell 6) Three off Filer, she's mixing up her pace at New Road, the final ball of the over down at the 50mph mark.
30th over: Ireland 114-3 (Prendergast 19, Stokell 5) Villiers nearly gets another return catch but Prendergast stands her ground at the non striker's end and Villiers can't get round to the looping catch. All fair game. Five off the over, run rate creeping up to ten. Gulp.
29th over: Ireland 109-3 (Prendergast 17, Stokell 2) Filer is getting into a better groove with her bowling, She's up into the mid seventies on the speed gun. Just a single off the over, Ireland need 181 from 21 overs. They've got to go some from here.
28th over: Ireland 108-3 (Prendergast 17, Stokell 1) One run and the wicket off Mady Villiers' third over. She looks like she is having a ball out there too. Rebecca Stokell joins Prendergast and is off the mark with a push to long on.
WICKET! Amy Hunter st Capsey b Villiers 39 (Ireland 107-3)
It was coming. Hunter decides to swing the blade, she comes charging down and Villiers beats her in the flight, Alice Capsey nudges off the bails with the batter stranded.
27th over: Ireland 107-2 (Hunter 39, Prendergast 17) Filer returns for her fifth over. A sharp bouncer keeps Prendergast honest and Ireland can't find the boundary once again, just two runs off the over and the pressure cooker hissing.
26th over: Ireland 105-2 (Hunter 38, Prendergast 16) Drop! Hunter clubs a full ball straight back at Villiers but it has too much pace and power on it and the bowler can't hold on in her follow through. Just three off the over, the required rate creeping up to 8 rpo now.
25th over: Ireland 102-2 (Hunter 37, Prendergast 14) Ireland bring up their hundred in the 25th over. England were fifty runs ahead of them at this stage. Time to take some risks.
24th over: Ireland 97-2 (Hunter 36, Prendergast 10) Prendergast picks up two thanks to a misfield at backward point. I think it was Captain Dean who was the culprit. Just three off the over.
23rd over: Ireland 94-2 (Hunter 36, Prendergast 7) Charlie Dean landing it on a sixpence and rattling through her third over. Just two off it. Mady Villiers is coming into the attack for the next over, can she get herself into the wickets once again?