Like baggy trousers, small sunglasses and leopard print, transfer rumours are back in a big way. And there can be no doubting the transfer ambition of the Premier League champions, Arsenal, who are eyeing up either Vinícius Júnior or Bradley Barcola as a deluxe Leandro Trossard replacement.
One sticking point for the Gunners is the former's apparent desire to stay put at Real Madrid, while Liverpool appear to be favourites for Barcola if they can muster the £145m Paris Saint-Germain are demanding for their fourth-best forward. The path may become clear for Vinícius to leave the Bernabéu, however, with the club closing in on a deal for the Ivorian World Cup sensation Yan Diomande. Perennial prospect Endrick has also been touted for a move away from Madrid this summer.
Staying with wingers, Everton's Iliman Ndiaye is coveted by the Saudi Pro League's Al-Hilal, while a potential fight for the signature of Pedro Neto could be upon us, with a few Saudi clubs in the mix with Liverpool and Manchester City. Why on earth Chelsea would want to sell such a talent is a good question, but balancing the books at Stamford Bridge is imperative after the £117m splurge on Morgan Rogers. Forgotten City wide man Savinho could be heading to Tottenham to make room for any new arrival at the Etihad.
Manchester United are staying out of the scramble for wide guys and instead concentrating their efforts on centre-forwards. If Joshua Zirzkee leaves this summer - with Juventus targeting the Dutchman - Ollie Watkins, 31 before the year is out, a possible replacement. United could ship out their young left-back Harry Amass to Coventry, either permanently or on loan, which has got some fans very excited about the possible arrival of Lewis Hall.
João Palhinha's future has been the subject of some speculation. Bayern Munich's sporting director, Christoph Freund, has made no bones about trimming their squad, paving the way for the Portuguese to join Aston Villa, but the midfielder would prefer to stay put. Mind you, he previously said he wanted to extend his loan stay at Spurs. Marco Silva - a former manager of the midfielder at Fulham - wants him at Benfica on loan.
Remember Mohamed Salah? Well the Egyptian King is still without a club after leaving Liverpool and enjoying some holiday after the World Cup. His next stop could well be Besiktas, with a stunning Darwin Núñez reunion on the cards if the Uruguayan also joins the Turkish club from Al-Hilal. Plenty of Saudi clubs are still on the Salah case and even Sporting Kansas from MLS have been linked.