That's it from me. It was a nice day out on the south coast for Arsenal who did just enough to suggest they could be title contenders while Brighton look like they should be fine with Arturo Ruiz despite Dario Vidosic's shock exit. We'll have a WSL roundup in a bit. Thanks for joining and please head over to join Tim de Lisle for live Premier League action of Everton v Manchester United ...
I'll leave you with this email from Stefan Eck on Lisa Baum: "It doesn't surprise me that Lisa Baum needed just eight minutes to adapt to English football! Not much more than one year ago that I saw her score one of the decisive goals for Hamburg's promotion to the Frauen-Bundesliga (against 1. FC Nürnberg). She probably couldn't improve anywhere better than under Renee Slegers. If only her move to the WSL were not another sign of the decline of the Frauen-Bundesliga ... just four years ago, we were so proud that Georgia Stanway had decided to play in Germany. Those days are over."
The atmosphere was brilliant so thank you to all the people who came to support us. We did enough to get at least a point here and there are way more positive things than negative. I'm happy about the work we did. Obviously it's a result we didn't want but we'll be back next week to go for the three points.
For Brighton and Arturo Ruiz, Nnadozie looked as good as ever in goal, Vanegas looked strong at the back and Seike's strong running was a constant menace. Kirby had her moments too.
Renee Slegers will be pleased to leave with the three points, even if she would have liked more goals. Arsenal's new signings impressed and Rodriguez was secure in goal.
Sue Smith on commentary made Georgia Stanway her player of the match but I would say Lisa Baum was the standout player. And it's most decisive one. Think Lauren Hemp or Arjen Robben raiding down the left wing. Speed, skill, trickery with a powerful shot to match. The 19-year-old is a star in the making.
79 min: Walti goes down holding her knee. Ruiz decides it's time for a triple change; Murphy, Tvedten and Garcia are on to make things happen in the last ten.
70 min: Foord wants to remind people that she is still an opetion on Arsneal's left wing despite Baum's heroics. Foord breaks inside and on to her right but lifts her curling effort high and wide.
67 min: Fran Kirby releases Kiko Seike with a lovely pass down the right. Her shot is deflected out for a corne,r which is punched clear by a commanding Rodriguez.
59 min: Baum carves her way from the left through the heart of the Brighton defence, leaving defenders trailing. It opens up and she lefts fly with her right foot but it dribbles through to the keeper. Interesting that the German teenager can go both ways though. A superb trait for a winger.
56 min: Olivia Smith is exactly the type of winger Mikel Arteta loves in the Arsenal men's side. Tenacious and defensively responsible as well as able to beat her full-back
50 min: Apologies. Sky just binned off the game on main event so after some scrabbling around i can see it again. No goals so far in the second half thankfully.
I think Ruiz will be pretty satisfied with his first 45 minutes as Brighton manager. His side couldn't do much about Baum's goal and they didn't fold after it happened. They grew into the game and looked like they could produce something on the counter.
The teams go into the interval. Lisa Baum's magnificent individual goal lit up an engrossing half. I'll grab a cuppa while the players have their oranges. Back soon.
43 min: Stanway releases Smith down the right. One, then two stepovers from the Canadian signal danger but Brighton defend well. 90 seconds in the half to go.
38 min: Almost a mix-up between Catley and Rodriguez at the back but they escape. without harm. Hope for Brighton here now. Arsenal getting aa little slack in their passing.