European countries began turning their backs on Gianni Infantino as moves intensified across the globe to end his crisis-hit tenure as Fifa president.
The Football Association was the highest-profile of several Uefa member associations to drop its support for Infantino's proposed re-election next year. It will write to Fifa confirming it no longer endorses Infantino for a fourth term in charge after the intense controversy surrounding his failed plan to sell a stake in the World Cup to private investors.
Wales and Serbia publicly confirmed that they had withdrawn their backing, following a lead taken by Finland last week. Along with the FA, those federations had all previously written letters in favour of Infantino prolonging his tenure but patience has run out across the continent. The Swedish Football Association, which was one of five European FAs not to write letters of support, issued a statement confirming it would oppose his candidature in the election in March.
The FA had previously fallen into line behind Infantino, who will helm an extraordinary Fifa congress confirming the United Kingdom's hosting of the 2035 Women's World Cup in November if he is still in position. But it has been consistent in condemning his doomed Fifa Forward Enterprise (FFE) scheme, publicly and in private representations. On Saturday it called for a "full and robust review of Fifa's leadership and governance", and its latest move is a further escalation.
It is joined by the Football Association of Wales, which said in a statement: "The Football Association of Wales hereby confirms its withdrawal of support for the candidature of Mr Gianni Infantino for re-election as Fifa president for the 2027-2031 term.
"The recent failures in good governance, processes, leadership, values, stakeholder management, communications and sound judgment have led us to a position where Mr Infantino has lost the confidence of the FAW to remain at the helm of world football. Failing to put the best interests of football first is a failure we cannot accept."
Striking a similar tone, the Football Association of Serbia explained recent events had "seriously damaged the reputation and credibility of both Fifa and its president", saying a withdrawal was "the only logical and rational step".
In a sign that consensus may not be easy to achieve, the Swiss Football Association stopped short of abandoning its countryman. Instead it asked for "another personal exchange of views with the Fifa president" and said it would "continue to review the developments surrounding Fifa" before the leadership election.
More countries are, however, expected to withdraw their support for Infantino in what amounts to a vote of no confidence. The intended effect is for the embattled president to resign although some insiders are braced for a drawn-out process. While the Asian Football Confederation (AFC) and Concacaf, which runs the sport in North and Central America, have both strongly criticised Infantino there has been no move by any of their individual federations to call back letters in favour of his re-election.
Ensuring they do so may be critical to the ongoing efforts to remove Infantino quickly. There is acknowledgement in some parts of Europe that other continents should be seen taking the lead if enough of a groundswell for his departure is to be reached. Only 15 countries have publicly supported Infantino since he shelved the FFE project on Saturday but there is an appetite to form a broad coalition against his re-election quickly.
The Concacaf president, Victor Montagliani, is a contender to take over if Infantino is deposed. Montagliani is understood to be in consensus with the Uefa and AFC hierarchies that new leadership is needed at Fifa.
In another blow to Infantino, lawyers acting for Uefa have ordered him and other staff to identify, locate and preserve all documents related to the FFE scheme. Their letter includes Arsène Wenger, the Fifa chief of global football development, among those obliged to comply with its order. It says Uefa is "actively considering legal action, arbitration, and/or regulatory complaints ... arising out of and in connection with the FFE plan".
Thrive Eternal, the investment firm that had been expected to lead a group taking a 20% stake in FFE, is believed to have been sent a similar letter. JP Morgan, which was enlisted for an advisory role in the scheme, is also understood to have received an order related to FFE.
On Monday afternoon the US State Department denied reports that Infantino had been scheduled to meet Marco Rubio, the United States secretary of state, in a bid to stoke up support for his continued reign as president.