Ella Toone and Chloe Kelly have been dropped from England's squad because of their performance levels by Sarina Wiegman, who has given a first call-up to the 20-year-old Chelsea midfielder Lexi Potter.
Toone and Kelly have played key roles in England's run of three consecutive major tournament finals but Wiegman made clear on Tuesday, when announcing her selection for the Women's World Cup qualifying playoff against Greece, that she wants to see more from them for their clubs.
"The main reason is that I think the levels weren't what I expect from them on the pitch," Wiegman said. The head coach "still believes in them" but said: "We expect a bit more and we know they can bring more. That was the message.
"There is also competition going on. It's about talent, it's about playing minutes and it's about the competition going on. I hope they can step up and show what they can do.
"I'm convinced they can do better, I think they are convinced about that, too. I think they took the feedback in a good and in a positive way but it's hard to take at the same time of course; it's not a nice message. I hope they respond to it really well. We will support them and of course they get the support at club, too. I hope they come back even better than they were before."
Neither Toone nor Kelly has scored or provided an assist in the Women's Super League this season, although Toone did score in Manchester United's 10-1 League Cup victory against the second-tier side Sheffield United last week, after she had been left out of their draw at Arsenal. Toone has started three of United's four WSL games. Kelly has started one of Arsenal's league matches, their Champions League win against Køge and made three WSL substitute appearances.
There was also no place for the Chelsea forward Aggie Beever‐Jones. Wiegman has called up the uncapped 18-year-old midfielder Erica Meg Parkinson and the London City Lionesses winger Freya Godfrey, and there is a return after injury for the captain, Leah Williamson.
There had been growing calls for the inclusion of Potter this term after her strong form for Chelsea, including her starring role in the 1-0 victory against Arsenal on Sunday. "She's grown a lot," Wiegman said.
"Last season we kept a close eye on her because she was getting into the squad and playing really well. But I think she's started the season so well. Her performances have really impressed us so she really deserves this call-up.
"She's shown at Chelsea that she can start against any team. The last game I thought she did very well against a top Arsenal [team]. What I've seen from her is that she comes out on the pitch and no matter who she plays against, she's just going to play and she's comfortable. I hope to see that next week."
The Lionesses face Greece in the first leg at the Pankritio Stadium in Heraklion, Crete on Friday 9 October before the return at Leicester's King Power Stadium the following Tuesday, needing victory to reach the second decisive round of the playoffs in December.
England are having to contest the playoffs despite winning five of six matches in their qualifying group, having missed out on top spot to the world champions, Spain, based on the head-to-head record from their meetings in April and June, in repeats of the 2023 World Cup final. England will be heavily fancied to progress to next summer's finals in Brazil.
That tournament could be Wiegman's last with England because her contract expires after the World Cup. She gave little away when asked about any contract discussions.
"We have regular conversations together, and we talk about the future at moments, but at this point I'm just focusing on Greece. We want to get through and qualify for the World Cup. Of course I talk to Mark [Bullingham], every two weeks, and we speak about what's happening now, what's in the future, but there's nothing new."