Another win for Celtic, on which Martin O'Neill had this to say about Egypt winger Haissem Hassan.
Hassan, one v ones, he can beat players all day long.
He's one that needs to get up to speed. He did fine in the World Cup, really fine in the World Cup. Not that we judged him in that, but he did fine. Then after the World Cup, I think he took about a seven or eight-day holiday and that's it.
So he's been doing a little bit of training on his own, but he's a handful. He's definitely a handful. He played a delightful ball just at the start of the second half and Yang should have scored.
"So he needs to get up to speed, he needs to obviously do a bit more work going backwards, but great.
Andrew Beasley ran the numbers on the WSL transfer window that closed this week.
Arsenal's new additions have a combined value of €3.9m, slightly more than the €3.5m of talent that London City Lionesses have gained this summer. The entire squads of eight of the 14 teams in the 2026-27 WSL are worth less than these figures, which highlights the impact the new players should have. Indeed, London City's new two-time Ballon d'Or winner Alexia Putellas is valued at €1.15m, which is more than the entire Charlton squad and not far behind the roster at Crystal Palace.
Just been watching Gianni Infantino arrive at the Fifa U20 Women's World Cup in Katowice. He did not comment on the imminent presidential election or the Josh Kushner affair when questioned by Sky News' Rob Harris.
Kushner said he "would not have gotten involved" in Fifa's plans had he known the full picture. He said this was all regrettable. Ostensibly mild and reasonable words, but with a sense of distance being carved out, of a cutting loose from the protective apron.
During that Forest-Tottenham game, Mykhailo Mudryk, whose last appearance was in November 2024, replaced Mathys Tel in the City Ground stalemate and Roberto De Zerbi is willing to be patient.
He's not ready yet. He's working to reach the best physical condition. He needs time, he needs work. In that position, we have Mathys Tel, big potential. But also Mathys takes too many wrong decisions, and Mudryk. So, two big players, two big potential players.
Neco Williams did not hold back when asked about his disallowed goal for Nottingham Forest against Tottenham.
It's a goal. VAR is there when there is a clear and obvious error and for me that is not clear and obvious. I've seen the images and the replays and at not one moment did I think I handballed it. I headed it in between my arms.
If you're going to pause it, it's going to look like it hit my arm but it didn't hit my arm. VAR is there to intervene with clear and obvious errors and that wasn't clear and obvious. I have seen all the images and at not one moment can you tell that has clearly hit my arms because it never.
I knew straight away I've headed it down in between my arms. At a loss at that one. Disappointing. A lot of decisions didn't go our way today but this is football. It's going to be like that. Could have been a penalty.
I think there were a few times where we could have and should have had a penalty, this is where the consistency is not there at the minute, but the big one for me is the disallowed goal. It's a goal for me, it didn't hit my arm so that's all I can say on that.
Dave Estherby gets in touch: "Not sure about the pile-on for Russell Martin - it takes a very select set of skills to make three teams in succession worse. Love to know the odds on him being the next Tottenham manager."
Trouble at Fulham? Crystal Palace made it three defeats in three in the Premier League.
Alvaro Arbeloa was asked about his job security: "It is not about my position, but I am very confident and I talk to my players that they are working in the way I want. They are playing how I feel the football. I came here because I believe in this football. They think that way. I think we will win games; I'm sure about that. When you are close, you don't need to feel hurt."
Lots of talent at Fulham but perhaps a lack of defensive strength.
Judging by my social media feed, Russell Martin's popularity ratings at Leicester are close to absolute zero.
Leicester's stuttering start to life in League One continued with a 4-0 home defeat by Oxford.
The Foxes, like their opponents relegated from the Championship last season, were looking to build on their first league win in midweek, but fell behind to an early goal from Mark Harris.
Oxford then put the game to bed with two goals in the space of three minutes either side of the hour from Mo Missanga and Harris before Jamie McDonnell's late strike completed a chastening afternoon for Russell Martin's side.
What did Martin have to say?
"It's painful, really painful. Today, we look like a team that's the opposite of what we have looked like. "We're so together, so aggressive and ready to fight for each other. And today, for that 25-minute spell in the second half, is unacceptable
"We had five kick-offs today and three of them ended up with a chance on our goal, which is crazy. I think it shows the lack of experience we have on the pitch and decision-making at times.
"Then we're chasing the game and we get caught in transition repeatedly against a team that are good at it. I made a couple of subs and took some experienced guys off to try and inject some energy in the game. "But the learning is, I think the team is too young and too inexperienced at the end. We were naive and too soft."
Martin has won four of his last 30 league games as a manager, 24 scored 61 conceded.
Big news at Liverpool to follow their Friday win at Ipswich.
With work already under way on Liverpool's summer transfer targets - including the signing of Bradley Barcola in a £123m deal - and Hughes enjoying a close working relationship with the new head coach, Andoni Iraola, it was agreed he would continue in the role until the end of the transfer window.
Liverpool say no approach was received from Al-Hilal for Hughes to start work with them this summer and are satisfied the sporting director worked for them alone throughout this period.
How will Everton react to their disappointments in the transfer window? David Moyes has been very open about his non-relationship with the ownership.
Moyes exposed an astonishing disconnect at the club when confirming he has had no contact with Friedkin, founder and chief executive of The Friedkin Group, since replacing Sean Dyche as manager in January 2025. TFG president, Marc Watts, is Everton's executive chair and Rishi Majithia, Friedkin's son-in-law, is the owner's day-to-day representative at the club. But with TFG's ambition for Everton under scrutiny after the transfer window, and amid claims they are looking for fresh investment or even to sell the club, Moyes's revelation raises further questions over the company's commitment.
Jacob Steinberg on Chelsea landing a player that Arsenal were interested in.
Chelsea were decisive. They were tracking Rogers before he left Middlesbrough for Villa in February 2024. Joe Shields, one of Chelsea's five sporting directors, worked with Rogers at Manchester City's academy. The signing was not done on a whim. Chelsea have a good relationship with Villa's owners and moved quickly after opening club-to-club talks a day after Rogers played in England's World Cup semi-final defeat by Argentina. The fee was £117m and Chelsea did not struggle to convince Rogers. Alonso wooed him and the deal was confirmed five days after negotiations began.
The temptation, after the first two weeks of the season, is to cast Mikel Arteta and Xabi Alonso in a similar light. Arsenal are yet to concede a goal. They dominated the Community Shield from the first minute, beat a shambolic Manchester City 3-0 and gave the sense that they could easily have won more comprehensively had they been minded to do so. They were no more troubled in beating Coventry by the same scoreline in their opening league game and, while they were rather less dominant, they were still extremely comfortable against Aston Villa on Monday and had been slowly increasing the pressure when Bukayo Saka gave them the lead just before the hour.