Henry Pollock has signed a new Northampton contract worth in excess of £400,000 a year, ensuring he will remain available for England beyond the 2027 World Cup.
The 21-year-old has roughly tripled his salary in a "multi-year" deal thought to extend until 2029. Pollock's future at the club had come into question when his representative, Eddie Hearn, suggested he deserved a seven-figure salary but while the new deal is a long way short of that, he ends up as one of the best paid back-row forwards in England.
The Northampton director of rugby, Phil Dowson, had insisted that a "happy medium" had to be reached for the Saints starlet, who has 13 England caps to his name, having already tied down Tommy Freeman to a new deal at Franklin's Gardens.
Pollock, who also earns about £150,000 a year as one of the 25 England players with an enhanced contract, last week said he would like to play abroad one day and try his hand at other sports. But for now his future lies with Northampton, with Hearn insisting there were a number of other lucrative offers turned down. "He left a lot of money on the table to stay with Northampton," Hearn said. "But it wasn't even a tough decision for him."
Pollock said: "I'm massively happy to re-sign with Saints, my boyhood club. It's an exciting place to be right now. We're in a great spot as a team, but it feels like there's still so much more growth in us. I'm still young, and we've got a young squad with a brilliant group of lads. Some of my best mates are here, and every day everyone pushes each other to improve and be the best players and team we can be. ... For where I am in my career, this is exactly where I want to be."
Dowson, who guided Northampton to their second Prem title in three years last summer, added: "Over the last few years, everyone has seen the quality he brings on the pitch and the speed of his rise through the game - but just as importantly, he's a young man of outstanding character. Keeping someone with both his talent and mindset is hugely important for the club.
"What's most exciting is that there's still so much more to come from him. Henry is incredibly ambitious and constantly looking for ways to improve. He understands that individual success comes from contributing to a successful team, and he's already taken on leadership responsibilities within the squad despite his age. Physically, he's an exceptional athlete. He's explosive, powerful and highly skilful, with the ability to influence a game in a number of different ways. But there are still areas of his game he can develop, and one of Henry's greatest strengths is how quickly he learns and adapts."