Jordan Cox was one of four half-centurions as England maintained control of the first Test against Pakistan - but there were a few regrets as no one reached three figures on day two in Leeds.
"We were hoping one of us would have kicked on and instead of make it just a hundred, make it 150, 160, 170," said Cox, who hit 73 in his first Test innings at No 3. "And then the game looks, not completely different, but it puts us in definitely a better position."
Nonetheless, England look primed to take a series lead. Harry Brook top-scored with 91 as Joe Root and Dan Lawrence hit 66 and 51, respectively, after rain delayed the start of play until 2.45pm. England closed on 366 for eight, extending their first-innings lead to 195.
Ali Usman was the one positive on another tough day for Pakistan, with the left-arm spinner claiming five for 92. "Hopefully, the boys can get 50 runs tomorrow," said Cox. "You never know, we've still got Jamie [Smith] at the crease there and Jofra [Archer], who can still give it a good whack. So hopefully 50-odd runs and then get to our work."
For Cox - who edged behind off Usman - there were mixed emotions as he missed out on a first international hundred, a score that would have been a serious statement while he fills in for the absent Jacob Bethell.
"I let myself down a tiny bit, but at the end of the day, you take 70, don't you? Once I got to 50, I got to about 60 quite quickly, and I was thinking, there's a chance here - just keep being disciplined. I definitely had it in the back of my mind thinking, you know, you've worked so hard, don't give this opportunity up."
Elsewhere, a Test comeback has been put on hold for Sam Curran after the all-rounder was ruled out of the rest of the English summer with a groin injury. Curran is an option England are considering as they figure out life after Ben Stokes.
The left-armer was not included in the squad for the first two Tests against Pakistan as he was not considered fully fit, but has been namechecked by Marcus North, the men's national selector, as an option to balance England's XI. He will undergo surgery on Friday, ruling him out of the third Test against Pakistan, starting on 9 September at Edgbaston, and the white-ball series against Sri Lanka that month.
While a regular member of the two limited-overs teams, Curran - who made his debut as a 19-year-old against Pakistan in 2018 - has not played Test cricket since August 2021.