The inaugural women's British & Irish Lions tour of New Zealand next year is expected to be broadcast live on Sky Sports in a significant boost for the women's game. Sky has held live rights for men's Lions fixtures since the 1997 tour of South Africa, and the broadcaster is understood to be in advanced discussions about adding the women's series to its portfolio.
The first women's Lions will play three Tests against the Black Ferns and two tour matches next September, with Sky expected to broadcast all five fixtures.
Sky's willingness to bid for the rights is a timely fillip for the sport given the disappointment expressed by Rugby Football Union officials at the BBC's decision to limit its coverage of the Red Roses' three home Tests this month to its red button and online channels.
The Red Roses have been regulars on BBC Two in recent years, but the main channel was showing the 1962 film Lawrence of Arabia last Saturday afternoon while the world champions were beating Australia 48-15 at Sale Sharks' CorpAcq Stadium.
Sky's investment in rugby union has dipped in recent years and it no longer broadcasts regular internationals or club matches, but it remains committed to its longstanding association with the Lions.
Talks are also taking place about extending the contract with the men's Lions to cover the 2029 series, which will also take place in New Zealand.
The women's Lions were launched in 2024 after a three-year feasibility study and, while France was also considered, New Zealand was confirmed that year as the destination for their first tour.
The Lions sprang a surprise this year by appointing the former England captain Jo Yapp as their first women's head coach in preference to the Red Roses' coach, John Mitchell. Yapp has started working for the Lions in a part-time capacity in conjunction with her existing role as head of the Rugby Football Union's women's pathway, but she will go full-time for the tourists at the start of next year.
Sky was contacted for comment.