Guardian writers' predicted position: 1st (NB: this is not necessarily Ed Aarons' prediction but the average of our writers' tips)
Last season's position: 1st
Prospects
Even losing on penalties in the Champions League final could not take any of the gloss off last season as Arsenal ended their 22-year wait to be crowned Premier League champions. The celebrations have continued all summer after some wild scenes on the streets of north London on their return from Budapest, although concerns over the fitness of some key players after their exploits at the World Cup are mounting.
Arsenal have acted quickly to reinforce their midfield by signing Bruno Guimarães from Newcastle given Declan Rice's workload must be managed very carefully after playing through neural pain in his hamstring and lower back since December. The arrival of Greece forward Christos Tzolis to replace Leandro Trossard also looks like a smart piece of business on the left-hand side of the attack. But with Vinícius Junior staying at Real Madrid, despite Arsenal's best efforts, supporters will be hoping there is still a chance that the sporting director, Andrea Berta, could conjure up a heavyweight attacking signing before the window closes given Bukayo Saka's fitness problems in recent seasons.
The back injury that will sideline William Saliba for an unknown period could prove even more central to Arsenal's hopes of retaining their title. A defence that conceded 27 goals last year in the Premier League may struggle without the immense talents of the France defender, even if they can bring in Ezri Konsa from Aston Villa as hoped. Whether Arsenal can maintain their dominance from set pieces over the past two campaigns will also be crucial, with more scrutiny expected from video assistant referees after the fallout from their controversial victory at West Ham in May.
Not since 1935, when Arsenal became the second team to win three successive league titles, have they retained their crown. Having strengthened the deepest squad in the division still further, they will take some stopping again.
Off-field picture
Money definitely isn't an issue for Stan Kroenke. Arsenal's co-owner became America's largest private landowner this year and has spent more than £1.5bn on new players since becoming the majority shareholder in 2011 through his holding company, Kroenke Sports & Entertainment (KSE). Next on the agenda is an upgrade to the Emirates Stadium that could increase the capacity of their home to more than 70,000. Talks have begun with the stadium's original architects, Populous, over a project that could cost up to £500m. The much-criticised shirtsleeve deal with Visit Rwanda ended last season and has been replaced by the HR company Deel, itself controversial in some sections of the Arsenal fanbase, while Emirates have renewed their longstanding partnership until 2033.
Owner-fan relationship
Kroenke and his son Josh - who are co-chairs - clearly revelled in carrying out the Premier League trophy at Selhurst Park before it was presented to the captain, Martin Ødegaard, after Arsenal's final game of the season in May. Having once been criticised for running the club "like an investment vehicle", now they are praised for the enormous effect they have made. Kroenke Jr's promise there would be "no standing still once this season ends" was an ominous sign to their rivals given KSE have a reputation as serial winners in a number of sports in America.
The manager
Mikel Arteta's expected bumper new contract extension - that will make him one of the best-paid managers in the world - has yet to be confirmed, but there is no doubting his commitment to the cause. The Spaniard could not bear to watch as Manchester City's challenge collapsed against Bournemouth last season and was in his back garden "building a fire" when Arsenal were confirmed as champions. With Pep Guardiola gone, Arteta has the opportunity to build a new winning dynasty of his own.
Star signing
The arrival of Guimarães was another big statement of intent from Arsenal. The former Newcastle captain wants to win more trophies after capturing hearts and minds on Tyneside and he will provide several options in the already well-stacked engine room. As well as relieving the load on Rice, the versatile 28-year-old Brazil midfielder is capable of fulfilling a number of roles, from deep-lying playmaker to box-to box destroyer. While it remains to be seen how Arteta chooses to use Guimarães when he also has Martín Zubimendi, Myles Lewis-Skelly, Ødegaard and Mikel Merino at his disposal, his talents will only add to the quality in Arsenal's squad.
Stat attack
Referees have been told to pay much more attention to grappling during set-pieces this season so it will be interesting to see if this has any effect on Arsenal. Only three teams in the Premier League had a better non-penalty expected goal difference than the Gunners had from set plays alone.
Set for a breakthrough
Max Dowman was a record-breaking revelation as he dipped his toes into senior football for the first time last season and the signs are that the 16-year-old could be handed more opportunities after impressing again during pre-season. A brilliant goal and an assist against Girona capped a man-of-the-match display from the right flank. With Saka and Noni Madueke to be eased back in after returning from World Cup duty, Dowman is ready to add to his solitary Premier League start, against Crystal Palace on the final day of last season, and should appear more regularly in cup competitions.
World Cup impact
Rice and Saka arrived in the United States feeling the effects of a marathon season and it was to their immense credit that they played through the pain barrier and made it to England's eighth match of the tournament. Only Thomas Tuchel knows why he left Saka on the bench in the semi-final against Argentina and his hat-trick in the third-place playoff a few days later showed how potent he can be even with an achilles problem. Both require an extended break before returning to the rigours of club football and Arsenal will give them as long as possible. But such is their importance that it will be sooner rather than later.