France has opened disciplinary proceedings against its ambassador to Central African Republic over allegations of misconduct, after claims he brought dozens of women into his official residence, raising potential security concerns.
The investigation comes as Paris seeks to rebuild relations with CAR after their sharp deterioration in recent years amid Russia's expanding influence in the former French colony.
The French weekly newspaper Le Canard enchaîné reported that the ambassador, Bruno Foucher, 65, brought about 30 women between the ages of 20 and 30 into his residence during the period of January 2024 to March 2026, with some of them staying overnight. The visits prompted officials to report a security breach.
The ambassador acknowledged having had sexual relations with two young women, the weekly said.
The French foreign ministry said: "At the initiative of the ministry, an administrative investigation was carried out in Bangui in 2026. Upon receipt of the findings of this mission, and at the request of the minister, the ministry initiated disciplinary proceedings against the ambassador. These proceedings are ongoing."
The ministry conducted an on-site inspection in April, which led to the opening of disciplinary proceedings.
Foucher is a career diplomat who has served as ambassador to CAR since 2023. He was ambassador to Lebanon from 2017 to 2020, to Iran from 2011 to 2016, and to Chad between 2006 and 2011.
According to Le Canard enchaîné, which said it obtained the inspection report, the ambassador received about 15 visits a month.
He also allegedly instructed staff to allow one of the young women to stay at the residence during his absence.
Russia maintains a strong foothold in CAR, primarily through the Wagner paramilitary group, which plays a key role in providing security for the country's president, Faustin-Archange Touadéra.
French officials have accused Russians of fostering anti-French sentiment in a number of African countries.
The French foreign minister, Jean-Noël Barrot, praised the "complete restoration of relations" between France and CAR when he visited Bangui in March.