Guardian writers' predicted position: 10th (NB: this is not necessarily Andy Hunter's prediction but the average of our writers' tips)
Last season's position: 13th
Prospects
A season stripped of the fear of relegation, featuring more proactive, front-footed football and the return of some hope: had Everton been offered that package before their relocation to Hill Dickinson Stadium last summer it would have been accepted gratefully given the turmoil of the previous four years. For four fifths of last season it was accepted gratefully, but then came a collapse that transformed perceptions of David Moyes's first full season back in charge. Talk of progress requires more supporting evidence this time around.
Everton were three points off the fifth and final Champions League qualification spot on 21 March having dismantled Chelsea in their finest performance at the club's new stadium. They did not win another game all season and slumped to 13th on the final day - the same position as the previous campaign under Sean Dyche and Moyes, with only one point more but an inferior goal difference. European football may well have been an ambitious target for a club adjusting to a new home and the loss of 10 players following the expiry of their contracts, loans included. But the opportunity presented itself to Moyes's team and they blew it.
Without the upheaval of last summer, with midfield resources improved and young players having had the benefit of a year's experience of the Premier League, European qualification could be a more realistic proposition this season. Provided a few glaring holes in Moyes's squad are finally filled. An upgrade on the limited centre-forward options of Beto and Thierno Barry is essential, although the latter has shown more promising signs in pre-season. Likewise a successor to Séamus Coleman - one of several big Evertonian losses behind the scenes recently. Everton's quest for a new right-back is their very own Odyssey, while central defence was another area of concern last season. Genuine progress, the measure of which is not open to debate, rests on the final moves of the window.
Off-field picture
The consequences of Farhad Moshiri's calamitous ownership are still being felt with Everton ordered to pay almost £40m in compensation to Burnley over the latter's relegation in 2021-22. Everton are appealing against the can-of-worms verdict by a Premier League independent disciplinary commission, along with the biggest financial penalty ever imposed on a Premier League club, but claim their latest punishment has not affected this summer's transfer plans. Many season ticket holders have been hit by above-inflation price increases - in some instances of almost 10% - and the club have extended a sponsorship deal with Stake, despite the UK government pledging to crack down on unlicensed gambling operators sponsoring British sports teams.
Owner-fan relationship
The Friedkin Group (TFG) has brought the financial stability that Everton desperately needed but it would be a stretch to suggest fans have connected with a low-key ownership group that rarely attend games. The man they appointed to run the club, chief executive, Angus Kinnear, annoyed supporters at the end of last season by claiming the hierarchy was "happily dissatisfied" with the first campaign at Hill Dickinson Stadium. The comment was portrayed as fresh evidence of Everton accepting mediocrity but in fairness to Kinnear, who was writing about TFG's determination to banish the threats of financial instability, relegation and regulatory sanction, he did add: "The progress is clear but we have not achieved anything yet."
The manager
David Moyes turns 64 in April and, while the Premier League's oldest manager clearly retains the hunger and ambition to rebuild Everton on a stronger footing, it will be interesting to see whether he retains the appetite for a fight with his critics in the event of a poor start. Particularly as the Scotland job remains available and he would appear the ideal candidate to succeed Steve Clarke. Moyes was exceeding his brief until the dismal end to last season cost Everton a shot at Europe and placed his team selections under an unforgiving spotlight. Talk of a contract extension has since gone quiet.
Star signing
It has been a sensible window rather than a sexy one from Everton so far - see replacing Idrissa Gana Gueye with the £7m Christian Nørgaard - but they might have delivered in swapping Dwight McNeil for Brennan Johnson. No one would dispute that the Wales' international's move from Tottenham to Crystal Palace in January fell flat, least of all Palace who were willing to take a significant hit on their £35m, one-time record investment only seven months later. But if the 25-year-old recaptures the form he showed at Nottingham Forest, or when scoring 18 goals for Spurs in 2024-25, he could prove a steal who addresses several problems in the Everton frontline.
Stat attack
David Moyes loves to keep a settled side. Everton averaged the fewest changes to their starting XI of any team in the 2025-26 Premier League. With the squad looking largely the same as last season, this trend should continue. But what if injuries bite?
Set for a breakthrough
Tyler Dibling would have been a strong candidate for this category last summer following his arrival from Southampton for an initial £35m. It reflects a nonevent of a debut season on Merseyside that he can be nominated 12 months on. Everton invested a lot of time and money into their pursuit of the England Under-21 international, who remains the most expensive signing of Moyes's second spell in charge, but the return was a huge disappointment. The attacking midfielder started only four league games and was not given a single minute after the 2-0 win over Burnley on 3 March. The manager did not hide his frustration with what he was seeing on the training ground.
World Cup impact
The longest World Cup in history should not have too onerous an impact on Moyes's squad. Only three of his players were involved and, of those, only Jordan Pickford was in action after 1 July. Pickford came in for familiar criticism following his performances against Ghana and Argentina despite reinforcing his status as England's undisputed No 1 goalkeeper across the tournament. Iliman Ndiaye started once for Senegal and was subbed in the 73rd minute with his country leading Belgium 2-0 in the last-32 tie. They ultimately lost 3-2. Nathan Patterson, whose Everton future is uncertain, featured in all three of Scotland's forgettable group campaign.