To the peeling of bells in the West Country, Leicestershire played out a draw at Trent Bridge, meaning that Nottinghamshire drop behind leaders Somerset in the Championship table, albeit by just four points.
Josh Hull's 97 on Friday proved only the tip of Leicestershire's tail as the last wicket pair of Tom Scriven and Josh Davey added 106, passing the follow-on and then continuing past lunch. Haseeb Hameed just had time to make his second century of the season before the teams shook hands. The draw also improves Leicestershire's chances of survival, in the relegation zone but just seven points behind Yorkshire.
Sussex completed victory over Essex in an hour and 20 minutes to tuck their feet under the mid-table of respectability. But it wasn't without a scare or two as Matt Critchley threw the grand piano at their bowlers, last man out for 96. James Coles, who has had a quiet season after the Hundred hoohah, finished with seven wickets in the match and a valuable 79. Essex now look nervously at the the three matches ahead.
Northamptonshire had just gained ironic applause for reaching 50 from the Wantage Road crowd when they were all out in 22.2 overs. Callum Parkinson was the chief destroyer with six for 20 as Durham hit cruise control towards promotion. Northants' chances of joining them were dealt a double blow when Kent finally winkled out Worcestershire, despite a doughty unbeaten century from Brett D'Oliveira. Kent tuck in behind Durham, 15 points clear of Northants
Derbyshire folded like a damp newspaper in the face of Gloucestershire's Sai Kishore (five for 20), losing a eye-watering 10 wickets in the final session of the match, bowled out for 105. Earlier James Bracey and Miles Hammond had both danced to centuries, Bracey becoming the first Gloucestershire keeper since Harry Smith in 1919 to make two hundreds in a game. A visibly thrilled Gloucestershire, who were 37 for five on day one, have won just two games this season, both of them against Derbyshire.
There was something in the ether this round - five scores below 120, though Northants snatch the booby prize after just scraping to 50. You'll just about time to clean your teeth before we're back on Tuesday, at 10.30am. Thanks for your company, have a lovely evening.
A pinch-me-crazy match. Derbyshire have lost ten wickets in a session. Bottom of the table Gloucestershire have now won twice this season, both times against Derbyshire. Sai Kishore leads Gloucestershire off with 5 for 20. Fletch calls Derbyshire's batting "abject."
Bristol: Gloucestershire 237 and 359-5dec BEAT Derbyshire 278 and 105 by 213 runs.
Lancs v Gloucestershire is suddenly more spicy on Tuesday.
Super bowling change by Bancroft as Ollie Price comes back and immediately gets Morley lbw, despite an pitcure-book straight bat. Bashir and Randell have eight and a half overs to survive. Derby 92-9.
But now Martin Andersson, who had nearly half the score with 37, must walk into the shadows, pushing forward and gobbled up at first slip by Cameron Bancroft. Derbyshire 85-8.
Andersson and Aitchison have batted out eight overs as Ollie Price takes a break. The long armed Ed Middleton has a go. I'm going to start writing up, but will keep an eye on events at Bristol.
To the peeling of bells in the west country, they've called it a day at Trent Bridge, after HH scored his second century of the season, an unbeaten 109. The draw means Notts drop to second in the table, though just four behind Somerset. Leicestershire remain in the relegation duo, but are just seven behind Yorkshire.
Trent Bridge: Notts 451-8dec and 178-1 DRAW with v Leicestershire 365
And another...Kishore magics a bunch of flowers that turns into a slippery soap bar when it gets near to Brooke Guest who is bewildered, Derbyshire 51-6.
Wicket number four for Kishore as Donald is bowled. Derby, who are the only side to have lost to Gloucestershire this year, are in danger of a unenviable double.
A third wicket for Matt Milnes as Adam Finch fences to third slip . Three also for Mahmud and Dudgeon. Dolly undefeated on 103 and applauded off the ground. Advantage Kent.
Canterbury: Kent 238 and 358 BEAT Worcestershire 217 and 295 by 84 runs
A first hundred of the season! Full-throated applause from somewhere, I'm guessing the dressing room. Kent's target drops to two figures. Canterbury is bathed in sunshine.
Belatedly, the reason Durham weren't playing Carse this match was because he "is rested for this fixture due to pre-arranged workload management with the ECB." Which seems a bit odd, especially as he wasn't picked for the white-ball series.
Northants' headcoach Darren Lehman isn't pulling any punches: "That's the worst batting performance I've had as a coach in my time because we just didn't withstand any pressure. I mean, I got bowled out for 60 when Stuart Broad got eight for 15, and actually, he bowled beautifully that day, and we didn't play and miss. And the Aussies actually didn't bat too bad that day.
"But this performance, especially against spin, we've played spin well all year. A couple of good balls, a couple of poor decisions, and that can happen when you get bowled out for 50.
"If we want to play Division One cricket, that's the standard you got to withstand, and we haven't done that both times we've played them [this year]. So that's a challenge for the group. You know, you get to a level, but we've got to be better than that.
"But take nothing away from Durham. They're a Division One side., I'm surprised they're in this division, and they won't be now. They'll be straight up, and they'll contend for the Division One title next year."
As flagged BTL, Leus Du Plooy, is to leave Middx after three seasons after recommitting to his native South Africa. That means he can no longer be played as a local player, thus invalidating his original deal. Since joining, he has played in 38 first-class games, scoring 2795 runs at an average of 51.75, with seven centuries and a highest score of 263, against Gloucestershire.
While the Canterbury crowd were in danger of drifting off, Keith Dudgeon, who has been skulking around the outfield all day, sends Waite's stumps flying. A big, fat, inside edge -out for 37. Worcs 265-6.
Well played! He becomes the first Gloucestershire batter since 2007 to scores hundreds in both innings of a match, and the first Gloucestershire keeper to tonk them since Harry Smith in 1919.
Marcus North said, ""Aneurin Donald and Henry Crocombe are two promising players who have earned their places on the back of impressive performances in domestic cricket.
"Aneurin has had an exceptional season for Derbyshire in the Vitality Blast and also with Trent Rockets in The Hundred while Henry is a player we have had an eye on all summer."
He steps, flicks and is caught by Montgomery, a second wicket for Andersson. Boorman soon follows for a nine-ball one. A super innings by Hammond that should have saved Gloucestershire from defeat number 10. James Bracey 86 not out.
At last! McCann sprints in and trapping Scriven lbw for 54, leaving Davey unbeaten on 49. Leicestershire, from 23-2, 365 all out, trail by just 86. Fireworks from Notts approaching?
More praise for Henry Crocombe, this time from Essex captain Tom Westley:
"Crocombe has that X factor where he can change a game and he showed us that in this game. He bowls at high speed which is a challenge in itself. But that was the defining moment in the match. It's hard to swallow. I think we played good cricket for a large percentage of the game but when you have 30 minutes like that it turns the game on its head."
Three games to take us to tea. Scriven and Davey are rather amusingly adhesively attached to the Trent Bridge crease.
Hammond and Bracey press on at Bristol, Gloucs 302-3 have a lead of 261 over Derby.
And Mahmud has whistled out another Worcestershire batter as the tension builds at Canterbury. Worcs, five down, need 151. Backbone D'Oliverira not out 76.
Sneaked under the bar while the pots and pans were crashing down at Wantage Road and Chelmsford. Well played, and to James Bracey, who is undefeated on 64.
Northants 50 all out in 22.2 overs. Durham win by 153 runs
A slash to first slip puts the full stop on a dismal morning for Northants that could have huge repercussions on the rest of their season. Stokes 2-9, Parky 6-20, Potts 2-13.
Wantage Road: Durham 205 and 261 BEAT Northamptonshire 263 and 50 by 153 runs