Victory in the Bahrain Grand Prix in Malaysia for Max Verstappen was surely as sweet as any he may have tasted, the Dutchman on top after what was an extraordinarily dramatic and, indeed, chaotic afternoon at the Sepang circuit. But in a race which had opened in an embarrassing farce for Formula One, it held in contrast only bitter disappointment for George Russell, whose retirement has left his title hopes shattered and his Mercedes teammate Kimi Antonelli within touching distance of the championship.
It is nine years since Malaysia hosted a grand prix and, standing in this weekend for the cancelled meeting in Bahrain, the much-loved circuit proved to be the grand stage to showcase a dominant drive for Verstappen and Red Bull, his and the team's first win of the season, beating Antonelli into second.
Moreover, as the champion in waiting demonstrated his credentials, there was a timely reminder that the driver whose success he hopes to emulate, Lewis Hamilton, has lost none of his touch. He took third for Ferrari, a remarkable comeback after a torrid afternoon, starting on the slick rubber in the wet which dropped him as far back as 17th and 80 seconds off the lead. He delivered a superb drive, determined and decisive, including a late pass for the podium place on Isack Hadjar, who finished fifth behind Ferrari's Charles Leclerc.
For Antonelli, even given Mercedes were no match for Verstappen and Red Bull in Sepang, he did what was required in leading his teammate for most of the race until Russell, who was in third place behind the Italian, had a power unit problem and had to retire. Heartbreak for Russell who has endured more than his fair share of bad luck this season.
For Mercedes it was a disappointment allied to a doubtless sense of deja vu, suffering an engine problem at the same track where Hamilton had a similar failure in 2016, which all but cost him the title. Russell acknowledged this had been a similar body blow, as Antonelli takes an 84-point lead with seven meetings remaining.
"You've almost got to laugh, I'm beyond disappointment," Russell said. "I don't need to say I think it's [the title] gone or whatever but of course it's exceptionally unlikely, and that's just the reality. I knew if I wanted to come back, I needed luck on my side. Unfortunately, I had luck not on my side."
Verstappen is out of the title fight but clearly took huge pleasure in a win as dominant as some of his best drives. Having passed Antonelli for the lead in the early stages he was untouchable out front, taking the flag nine years after he won in Malaysia.
Yet his win was preceded by farcical scenes as this season's engine formula was found sorely wanting the first time it was tested in wet conditions. F1, which prides itself as the pinnacle of motorsport, was brought low by a spot of rain and, of all things, some dicky software. Hardly the stuff of the gladiatorial arena it wishes to present.
After a downpour swamped the circuit before the off, this was the first time these cars had run in the wet this season and the engines, with an almost 50-50 split between electrical and combustion power and already facing fierce criticism, proved to have problems that had not been anticipated.
The start was delayed by 45 minutes but as the rain eased the cars took to the track for two formation laps, Hamilton was swiftly among a swathe of drivers who had a software problem. He slowed and had to effectively reboot his car but he was not alone and there were similar issues affecting other competitors, including Verstappen, noting he could not accelerate, and two of the Ferrari-engined Haas and Cadillac also stopping, with many drivers reporting the same problems to varying degrees. It left the field out of order and in some cases not even on the same lap and the start was suspended.
That, in turn, prompted a further delay of 53 minutes as the cars were resorted into grid order and the governing body, the FIA - now it appears functioning as the sport's IT department - uploaded new software parameters to the cars to deal with the problem. The issue was caused by the engines' software, now so intrinsic to delivering the power, and incapable of coping with the low revs used in wet, low-grip conditions because of, it is believed, the complex algorithm that is designed to prevent teams using traction control.
None of which takes the sheen off Verstappen's victory, which represents an extraordinary turnaround delivered with no little fortitude. For the opening half of the season the car was a handful to drive and even Verstappen, for all his skill, was struggling to master it. Since which, Red Bull have delivered upgrades perhaps beyond expectations and securing a win was a mighty achievement.
Once he retook the lead from Antonelli, who had swept past at the start, the Dutchman was in control throughout, while Russell made up places to be in third, only to have to climb despondently from his car with five laps to go. The victory belonged to Verstappen but Antonelli emerged from Sepang very much on top while F1 is left to consider why "computer says no" was another foible that had not apparently been foreseen in possibly the least popular regulations the sport has ever delivered.