Finlay Tarling, the younger brother of Netcompany Ineos rider, Josh Tarling, has been killed while racing in stage eight of the Volta a Portugal.
Although the details are yet to be confirmed, reports in the Portugese and French media suggest that the 19-year-old Welsh rider was hit by a non-race vehicle travelling on the course in the opposite direction to the peloton.
In a statement, the race organisation said: "The organisers of the Volta a Portugal em Bicicleta, Jogos Santa Casa, deeply regret to announce the death of British cyclist Finlay Tarling, from the NSN Development Team, following a serious accident that occurred during the eighth stage of the race, between Melgaço and Fafe.
"At this time of profound sorrow, the organisers of the Volta a Portugal and the Portuguese Cycling Federation extend their deepest condolences to Finlay Tarling's family, his teammates, the NSN Development Team, and all his friends and loved ones."
Tarling was a highly-rated young talent and time-trialling prospect and had placed third in the under-23 time trial at the British National Championships this summer.
His NSN Development Team posted: "We are heartbroken to announce the passing of Finlay Tarling at the Volta a Portugal today."
"Fin was a much-loved member of our team but most importantly, he was a son, a brother, and a friend to so many. He will be deeply missed. Our deepest condolences go out to Fin's parents Michael and Dawn, his brother Josh, and everyone who was lucky enough to call Fin a friend. Rest in peace, Fin."
Finlay Tarling's progression had been through track and road racing. He joined the then Israel-Premier Tech Academy prior to 2025. He continued with the team after it was rebranded as the NSN Development Team for 2026, and, developing a reputation in European racing as a time trial specialist, finished 11th in the opening prologue stage of the Portugese race in Lisbon.
The eighth stage, of 166.8 kilometres from Melgaco to Fafe, was neutralised with 23 kilometres to race, following Tarling's death and the podium ceremony cancelled. His teammates rode together to the finish line in a show of solidarity.
In a post on X, cycling's governing body, the UCI, said it was "deeply saddened by the tragic death of British rider Finlay Tarling, who passed away following a serious accident during today's eighth stage of the Volta a Portugal."
The Portugal prime minister Luís Montenegro also expressed his condolences to Tarling's family and team, adding on X that the news of his death "leaves us deeply shaken."
Stephen Park CBE, the performance director for the Great Britain cycling team, said: "All of us at British Cycling are heartbroken to learn of the tragic passing of Finlay Tarling at the Volta a Portugal. Fin was a talented rider with a fantastic future ahead of him, a loyal teammate and an all-round brilliant young man.
"Our deepest sympathies are with his parents and brother, Josh at this tragic time."