The Commonwealth Games debut of Idi Amin's grandson ended in ignominy and disgrace as the boxer was disqualified in the third round for head-butting his English opponent - and then launched a bitter verbal assault on the referee.
Things then took an even more bizarre turn as Aziz Abdul, a 25-year-old from Uganda, refused to speak to a journalist afterwards because of what he had written about the tyrannical dictator.
"No, not you," Abdul told the man from the Press Association. "I don't like you." A Ugandan team official quickly clarified: "It is because of the things you said about his grandad."
Amin is estimated to have killed half a million people in Uganda after coming to power in a coup d'état in 1971, and also forced the expulsion of 80,000 people of Asian descent.
However, Abdul insisted before his super-heavyweight fight with the 21-year-old Damar Thomas from Kilburn that his grandfather's achievements "had inspired me" and "I am so proud of him".
Abdul, who is also known as Aziz Ringo after his self-titled signature punch, also promised he would be "the new king of Scotland" - after his grandfather had offered to liberate the Scots from England. However, the most Scottish thing about Abdul proved to be the Glasgow kiss he planted on Thomas when he was 20-16 down on the scorecards. Afterwards he complained, without foundation, that the decision was unfair.
Afterwards Abdul complained that the decision was unfair. "There were a lot of fouls," he said. "Holding, elbowing, a lot of bullshit. The officials cannot judge them. When other countries do this they are disqualified. All I can say about this is the referee's decision is not right and I am not happy."
Abdul also criticised the referee for ruling that he had been knocked down in the first round, after taking a punch. "He took a light punch and they counted," he said. "I landed a heavy punch on him and they deducted my points and warned me. I'm a black African, I know. It's God's plan. I don't know why the officials are scared about this fight. Why can't they let this fight continue?"
He also insisted he had not deliberately head-butted his opponent. "He got me with the elbow," he said. "It was not intentional because I was trying to come back. How can I head-butt someone? I would not head-butt someone.
"When I was still in Uganda, I said I must win by knockout. It's an away match for me here. Next time I must end the fight in the first minute."
"Next time, I will get him," he added. "Anytime in the future. Two years, five years, 10 years. I will show him that Aziz Ringo is a real warrior. It's so painful."
Thomas, meanwhile, is now guaranteed a medal after a wild fight with plenty of haymakers and very little quality work. "I got the job done, not how I wanted to, but the job is done," he said. "He was running at me with his head. There was a bit of ring rust from me but it is what it is."