It was slip-catching heaven at Taunton, with Somerset's fielders gobbling seven in Glamorgan's first innings, and James Rew scooping up the rest. Ben Kellaway was the only man to pass 50. Somerset's innings started under lights, but a milky sun eventually emerged to light the way and allow Somerset to steal a march on their Championship rivals, whose matches were curtailed by rain.
Charlie Bennett's pain was Jamie Porter's gain at Chelmsford after the young seamer limped off after three overs. To a background of autumnal slate, Porter then grabbed three for 32 for Essex against Sussex, who chose to bat and progressed in fits and starts. Sam Cook pocketed the 500th dismissal of his professional career.
At the Oval, Yorkshire limped along from the ignominy of one for three, which included an elegant flying catch by Ben Foakes to dismiss Will Luxton for a duck. James Wharton and Matthew Revis added 89, but Yorkshire then lost four for 21, including Jonny Bairstow, who stamped and delivered a pitch-perfect slip catch to Ollie Pope. Dan Worrall bowled beautifully for three for 24.
After making a sudden U-turn on the selection of Scott Kuggeleijn, relegation-threatened Hampshire were in trouble on the field as well. Rob Yates and Dan Mousley both embroidered half-centuries as Warwickshire piled on 141 for one between the showers.
David Bedingham passed 1,000 runs for the season in the process of an elegant fifty against Northants. There had been rebuilding to do after Durham slumped to 16 for two, a wonder ball by Luke Procter plucking out Ben McKinney's middle and off stumps and pinging them in different directions, while Will Rhodes was brilliantly run out by James Sales. Meanwhile, Division Two promotion rivals Kent had a so-so day against Worcestershire, losing five for 25 in the evening session. Daniel Bell-Drummond pinged 52.
After two months on the sidelines with a dodgy calf, Jimmy Anderson showed Lancashire what they'd been missing by reducing Middlesex to 20 for two. But Max Holden and Leus du Plooy steadied the ship on a damp, dark day at Merchant Taylors' School.
Gloucestershire's dismal season continued, after choosing to bat and being reduced to 62 for five against Derbyshire. Only James Bracey, flameproof boots on the burning deck, made more than 10. There were two wickets for Shoaib Bashir. Only 10.3 overs were possible at Trent Bridge, but Notts captain Haseeb Hameed, who has struggled for form this season, stroked six morale-boosting fours.
A damp day around the grounds, but Somerset were able to steal a march on their Championship rivals after bowling Glamorgan out cheaply and then tapping the bowling around as the sun came out. Fingers crossed for better weather tomorrow, do join us then, have a lovely evening.
After dismissing promotion chasers Kent for 238,Worcestershire are 8-0. Time for me to write up for the paper, but do keep an eye on things for me BTL.
Essex are working their way through Sussex in methodical order. Porter has three for 32 and I've just learnt that he wasn't initially selected but was a late substitution into the team for Charlie Bennett who bowled three overs before limping off. Sussex 199-7, a valuable eighth wicket partnership between Goodman and Leaning has added 36.
Things are moving along at The Oval, not necessarily in Yorkshire's favour. Wharton (45) and Revis (40) were separated after a partnership of 89. Jonny, dear Jonny, didn't last long, directing a slip catch straight into Olly Pope's hands. Yorks 110-6.
A bit of news from Grace Road, Liam Trevaskis will leave the club at the end of the season. Best of luck to him. They're playing at Trent Bridge now, where Notts are 29-0 against Leicestershire.
It looks damp at Taunton, and on my TV screen two tiny men in umpires coats are walking back to the pavilion. A good handful of stoical fans are visible in the stands. Glamorgan were all out for 194, three wickets for Pretorius, two each for Gregory, big Craig and Tom Lammonby.
Gosh, Gloucestershire disintegrated like a wet paper bag while I was away - 62 for five. A couple for Randell, a couple for Bashir, one for Aitchison. James Bracey surveys the burning deck in his well-used flame-proof boots.
Tea is approaching, at some of the grounds, though they're still off for rain and damp at Wantage Road (Durham 112-3); Trent Bridge (Notts 9-0) and Southampton (Warwicks 141-1, Yates and Mousley charging along). I've got to disappear briefly to write a blob for the paper, but comments are still open of course.
There are a lots of slip catches about today, the next at Chelmsford where Charlie Tear (39) has nibbled at Jamie Porter and Simon Harmer collected in his huge paws. Sussex 110-4.
The outfield still looks pretty parched at MTS and Jimmy A is having fun. He currently has 2-19, including Max Holden just sent on his way, beautifully bowled between a thrusting front pad and bat, dinking the bails out of their grooves. Middx 28-2 after chosing to bat.
With soft hands and knocked-knees, Craig Overton holds on at slip after dropping one moments earlier (and in the last game), an away swinger from Lewis Gregory does the business. Dickson the man out, Glamorgan 125-6.
Somerset's fielders are snug in cable-knits. Ben Kellaway has made yet another pretty 40 something, but he's lost partner Ingram for 13. Glamorgan 116-4.
Looks like a quite a peachy at The Oval for a rainy day, some gentle chatter meandering along on the stream. Yorkshire have recovered from 32-3, Revis looking quite perky. Time to watch some Somerset I think.
Worcestershire are chipping away at Kent, Northeast (43) and Muyeye (37) both out within three runs of each other. Bell-Drummond and Benjamin with the rebuild. Kent 111-4.
Action now everywhere except Merchant Taylor'sSchool (where Josh Bohannon has been dropped by Lancs, and Jimmy Anderson returns); and Bristol, where bottom of the table Gloucestershire entertain Derbyshire.
A fabulous ball by Luke Procter, which by some sleight of hand plucks out both McKinney's middle and off stump and sends them in different directions. Durham 14-1.
They are back out again at Wantage Road: Lees and McKinney v Sanderson and Procter, as Lewis Gregor sends one shimmering past Ben Kellaway's outside edge at Taunton.
Switch over to the Somerset stream. Craig Overton, Robinson like in his approach, feet splayed at five to one, has the ball, and a wicket - Mason Crane pouched at second slip by Tom Abell after fancying something flashy on the off side. Glamorgan 57-3.
With the news that Dan Moriarty has been released by Yorkshire, just thinking about the trajectory of other promising spinners in county cricket - Amar Virdi (who during Covid was involved in England training and reserve squads) was released by Surrey in November 2024 and the centrally contracted Shoaib Bashir went all round the houses on loan before signing with Derbyshire last winter. But Bess (Yorks), Leach (Somerset), LPW and Farhan Ahmed (Notts), Rehan Ahmed (Leics), the Parkinsons (Kent and Durham), Harmer (Essex) Carson (Sussex), and Kellaway (Glam) seem to be holding steady. I'm sure I've forgotten someone, do let me know who.
Play at Chelmsford (Sussex 38-2); Southampton (Warwickshire 22-1, Young-Currie-3), Taunton (Glamorgan 45-1); Canterbury (Kent 54-2) and just now at Wantage Road (Durham 0-0).
Two more games have chugged into action. Warwickshire are 9-0 at Southampton; and Glamorgan, spearheaded by Crane and Tribe, have raced along to 31-0 against Somerset.
A little shout out to Hove and Away,the independent website covering Sussex cricket. The site is a treasure-trove of all things Sussex written by Bruce Talbot and Paul Weaver, two wise sages, and great journalists, who've covered Sussex forever (and very helpful to me for a piece on Ollie Robinson yesterday). I've just read there today that the Sussex chief exec Mark West is leaving at the end of the season.
Meanwhile Hughes and Tear have survived a couple more overs and Sussex have moved on to 17-2.
Sam Cook is taking large chunks of Sussex for breakfast - Haines and Clark both out almost identically, nibbling into the gloves of Pepper. Sussex 7-2.
Rain at The Oval too, where my daughter is looking after my nephews and a couple of their friends. If you see an auburn haired young woman looking harassed, placate her with a mini roll. Auqib Nabi is Surrey's latest recruit.
Hampshire statement - "Kuggeleijn will not represent the club"
"Having reflected and listened to feedback from our staff and supporters. Hampshire Cricket can confirm that Scott Kuggeleijn will not represent the Club.
"We value the passion of our fanbase and thank everyone who took the time to share their views.
"Our focus now turns to supporting the team through the final four County Championship fixtures of the season.
"We encourage everyone to unite behind the team as we enter a crucial stage of the campaign."
Amongst a sack of September signings, Hampshire's announcement yesterday that they had called on Scott Kuggeleijn is the most eye raising. Kuggelijn, a fast bowling allrounder who has played 23 times for New Zealand, was put on trial for rape in 2016 and, after a hung jury, again in 2017. He was found not guilty, but some of his own evidence in court was very disturbing. You can read a little about it here.
Kuggelijn has also played for Dubai Capitals, who are owned by the same GMR group who own Hampshire.
Good morning! A little late this morning after forgetting my own missive that play starts at 10.30am, September rolling in and landing, at least in Manchester, damp and grey. There are four games left of the season, things hotting up as the temperature drops.