Richard E Grant's Very Modern Odyssey
8pm, Channel 4
Christopher Nolan's blockbuster was always going to trigger a slew of celebrity travelogues - but quite frankly, that can be forgiven when it's Richard E Grant's turn. The actor has been obsessed with The Odyssey since reading it as an 18-year-old, which is reason enough to visit the Mediterranean places that are said to have inspired Homer. Malta is the first stop, where Grant oozes his usual charisma and is "utterly bewitched" by pretty much everything. Hollie Richardson
Force of Nature
7pm, ITV1
Ever seen platypus on a first date? It's brief and bizarre, as Andrew Lincoln describes in the second episode of this top-notch nature series. Once they're done, we follow the female as she lays eggs and prepares for them to hatch within seven days - but there is a wild storm brewing upstream. Will she survive the flash flood? HR
Van Der Valk
8pm, ITV1
Marc Warren returns as the irascible Amsterdam cop who would likely benefit from spending some time in a weed cafe. A professional hit on a crime gang whistleblower sees him awkwardly reunite with an old flame working on the protection detail. Can they stop rehashing the past long enough to safeguard a second snitch? Graeme Virtue
The Piano
9pm, Channel 4
This week, the talented pianists head to London Bridge station in a bid to impress guest judge Jools Holland. Will an 84-year-old's cracking rendition of Roll Out the Barrel have enough boogie-woogie to win him over? At the other end of the scale, there's a child who sparks a mass singalong. Hannah Verdier
Great Violinists at the Proms
9pm, BBC Four
To mark rising-star violinist Sueye Park's "dazzling" Proms debut with the Sibelius Violin Concerto, Katie Derham presents a collection of great violin solos that have graced the Royal Albert Hall. That includes Liya Petrova, Nicola Benedetti and Nigel Kennedy. HR
Groomed: The Truth Behind the Lie
9pm, Sky Documentaries
An incisive three-parter that follows up on the case of Barrow resident Ellie Williams, who was convicted for lying about an Asian grooming gang. How have far-right groups weaponised this? And why have other women's allegations of abuse been ignored? Williams's family also speak for the first time. HR
Film choice
Singin' in the Rain, 8pm, Sky Cinema Greats
If you're one of the many devotees of Damien Chazelle's 2016 Oscar-winner La La Land - or maybe just in need of a cheer-up - be sure to check out this foundational 1952 Hollywood musical. Gene Kelly's genius is on full display as Don Lockwood, a star of the silent era who is attempting to ride out the transition to sound cinema with his integrity intact. There are also glorious supporting turns from Donald O'Connor and Debbie Reynolds, while the defiant exuberance of that title song shines through every scene, and every rain cloud. Ellen E Jones
Live sport
The Hundred Cricket: London Women v Manchester Super Giants Women, 2.15pm, BBC Two London Men v Manchester Super Giants Men follows at 6pm.