There was a strange atmosphere on the final day of the Lord's Test last week. It was a bank holiday Sunday, Jofra Archer was bowling the occasional rocket, and England were about to wrap up a much-needed series victory over Pakistan. The ground wasn't full - it's harder to sell day-four tickets in advance these days - and you couldn't help the feeling that the denouement was a little, well, flat. Yes, the home crowd enjoyed the win. They'd have liked a bit more contest too.
Instead, it was the Pakistan Cricket Board that delivered the fifth-day drama, issuing an immediate recall of nearly half the team as if they were a bad batch of eggs. Perhaps some will see it as the decisive display of authority that Aaqib Javed, Pakistan's director of high performance, would like them to give. For others, well-versed in the board's volatile leadership, it's just the PCB doing PCB things.
It was, for certain, a bizarre and peremptory act. The kind that would once have felt seismic, a piece of sporting history in the making. Remember the infamous 2026 tour, when Pakistan sent several of their senior players home a week before the final Test? Instead it slotted quite neatly and naturally into a broader cricketing landscape where every decision taken seems to make increasingly less sense to the average watcher, from the international fixtures schedule to Harry Brook's batting.
The global game is changing at a speed that few seem comfortable with, yet no one can halt. The short-form smashabouts of ahistoric franchise leagues are becoming the de facto ambition of the professional cricketer. World Cups are the practical outworking of Indian government policy. The official best Test team in the world are a side that haven't played a Test since last November. (Still thrilled for you, though, South Africa.)
We in England are conditioned to think of cricket as an old-fashioned pastime that struggles for relevance in today's football-focused world. Yet few sports, surely, have so closely mirrored the pace of societal change. Cricket has code-switched, shortened its format, shifted its audience and power-base. It has repeatedly remade itself into easily clippable content for the digital era. Even its most prized and traditional form can't resist the trend of the dwindling attention span.
If it feels like Test matches are getting ever shorter, you're not imagining it. This isn't just grandfatherly nostalgia for the days when Trevor Bailey could stonewall 68 off 425 against Australia. It's a stone-cold statistic: between 2019 and 2025, the number of matches finishing in under 200 overs tripled; the 39 games played to results last year (only two were drawn) lasted an average of 272.1 overs, which is just over three days.
No one minds the odd comedy collapse, or spectacular bowling spell. But over the past few years - you may call it the Bazball era, I couldn't possibly comment - the sense of disappointment and frustration as teams have folded and games failed to go the distance has only added to the fears for Test cricket's future. A sense that the most precious form of the game is facing its end times is of course nothing new. Back in the 1950s there were grave fears that it was becoming too boring to survive (that Bailey again). In 1996, the then Wisden editor, Matthew Engel, invented the world Test rankings in response to what he saw as a looming existential crisis.
Why, then, does the current state of the game feel so acutely unsettling? Perhaps because the narrative of Test cricket's decline has always been one of entropy, and waning public interest. The reality, today, is more hectic than we could ever have imagined. The global Test schedule continues, but in bite-size, two-match series. Some of the batting we see in them is increasingly indistinguishable from the frantic style of the franchise action that ought, if there were any logic to the sport's elite pyramid, to be raising overall standards.
There remains plenty of entertainment to be found amid the chaos. The past couple of years have elicited exciting performances and extraordinary results, from New Zealand's 2024 series win in India to Bangladesh's recent humbling of Australia. But the truth is that while no one in cricket professes to want anything other than a hearty, healthy future for Test cricket, no one - including those ostensibly in charge - is sure how to deliver it. The current Future Tours Programme runs out next summer and the next, still to be announced, is expected to skew towards one-off Tests.
Test cricket, as befits an event that can rack up as many hours as a Game of Thrones box set, has always felt like one of sport's most solid, stolid creations. That is part of its USP, as an intermittently dramatic long-form entertainment. Even its macro narratives have frequently contained something of the epic, be it the West Indies' dominance in the 70s and 80s, or Australia's obduracy in the 90s and 2000s, or England being crap for 18 years straight. It was a game with tectonic timelines. Now it seems that its very foundation is crumbling. Players pass through Test sides on their way to a T20 payday. Games and series are over before they've registered.
For a lot of cricket fans, then, this is a sad and alarming time. We're witnessing the sudden destabilisation of the game we love. We feel powerless to prevent it and it all seems to be happening very fast. The idea that something as valuable - and colossal, and institutional - as Test cricket could collapse on our watch, like a glacier ice shelf, or democracy, seems both unthinkable and increasingly likely. And yes, I realise as I write this that it's just possible that for some of us the issue is a proxy for the wider fears and agonies of our time. Save Test cricket, save the world?
-
Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here.