The Commonwealth Games in Glasgow opened on Thursday evening to the surreal sight of King Charles and Queen Camilla stepping out of a Tardis - and a mechanical Loch Ness monster roaring the first few bars of Flower of Scotland.
The Tardis was a nod to the fact that police boxes were designed by the Scottish architect Gilbert MacKenzie Trench. But the Doctor Who reference proved to be doubly apt given the Games faced being exterminated until Glasgow stepped in after Victoria pulled out due to financial pressures.
And with the prime minister, Andy Burnham, watching on in his most significant public engagement since taking office on Monday, this was an opening ceremony that was also notably political.
At one point a spinning clock turned into a kaleidoscope, with organisers wanting to reflect the change that overcomes people when we are freed from the shackles of work. On another, there was a visit to Glasgow's famous shipyards, while the screen displayed the message "People make Glasgow".
The last time Glasgow hosted the Games in 2014, Rod Stewart had them swinging in the aisles at Hampden Park and a nervous Susan Boyle forgot the words to Mull of Kintyre. But this, necessarily, was a more stripped-back affair.
It had to be given that the budgets for these Games are so much smaller. There are also only 10 sports compared with 19 in Birmingham four years ago, and 3,000 athletes compared with nearly 5,000 back then. As a result, the Commonwealth Games is having to cut its cloth accordingly.
Understandably, it meant that the opening ceremony was largely a belts-and-braces affair. There were no dazzling pyrotechnics. The biggest musical star was KT Tunstall. And more than half of it involved celebrating the athletes as they paraded in front of a nearly packed Hydro Arena.
But the crowd still loved it. One of the biggest cheers of the night came when the Scottish team, led by bowls star Alex "Tattie" Marshall, came out in their kilts. They waved their phones as they sang along to I'm Gonna Be (500 miles).
And they were off their feet as Callum Beattie sang Yes Sir, I Can Boogie as sparkly unicorns danced across the stage in homage to Glasgow nightlife.
It was not particularly flashy. But it was authentic. Perhaps there was a subtle message here for Burnham, who was seen making small talk with the Queen and nodding along to the musical interludes. You are who you are.
And while some have questioned whether the Commonwealth Games has a future, the King made an impassioned case as he declared the 23rd edition open.
"The Commonwealth is a unique and extraordinary family of nations," he said. "As we gather, we celebrate the dedication and talent of every athlete and team. Your perseverance inspires us, and we eagerly anticipate your achievements in the coming days."
The king also used the baton relay, which has carried messages from the 74 Commonwealth nations to Scotland, to make another political point by stressing the need to tackle pollution in the oceans.
"For these Games, the relay has carried another message - to help remove the plastic pollution that harms our oceans and waterways, and can impact on human health," he said. "Addressing plastic pollution complements the immense global efforts required to protect 30% of the world's ocean by 2030.
"Caring for the ocean's natural capital ensures our communities and businesses can continue to thrive," he added. "And vital global food resources can be enhanced through the establishment of marine reserves to restore threatened marine ecosystems and diminished fish stocks."
The night ended with KT Tunstall having the crowd eating out of her hands with a pounding rendition of No Scotland No Party, which segued into Suddenly I See and Scotland is a place called Home.
That had the athletes on their feet and waving their flags - and leaving the Hydro with the feelgood factor. The big question now is whether it will sustain itself over the next 10 days of sporting competition. A lot is riding on it - not only for the athletes but the future of these Games themselves.