Guardian writers' predicted position: 2nd (NB: this is not necessarily Jamie Jackson's prediction but the average of our writers' tips)
Last season's position: 2nd
Prospects
Enzo Maresca was already in herculean task mode by signing on as the man charged with continuing the dynasty built by Pep Guardiola at Manchester City before Rodri decided to leave the club and join Barcelona. The 30-year-old may be headed for a second Ballon d'Or after his displays in Spain's triumphant World Cup campaign, so the loss of a midfielder capable of moulding games domestically and in the Champions League represents a sizeable blow for Maresca.
There are further negatives too, with John Stones, Nathan Aké and Bernardo Silva also no longer at City. On the positive side, Elliot Anderson has joined for £116m from Nottingham Forest having impressed for England at the World Cup. City's new manager also has Erling Haaland, who will be favourite to claim a fourth Premier League Golden Boot in five seasons. Less certain is how Phil Foden will perform despite being boosted by a bumper new contract. Can the boy from Stockport dovetail with Rayan Cherki and once more pull the strings for his boyhood side?
Off-field picture
City are a best-in-class organisation, who can be used as an exemplar of how to pursue excellence on and off the field. This, of course, would change were they found guilty over the 130 charges brought against them for alleged breaches of Premier League rules. It has been more than three years since the charges were announced, with City continuing to deny any wrongdoing. The new Pep Guardiola Stand, opened for the great man's final home game last season, means 61,000 fans can now witness Haaland and co go to work, the Etihad Stadium's capacity having previously stood at 53,400.
Owner-fan relationship
Sheikh Mansour is a hero to the City faithful for a glittering period of ownership that has elevated their team to a domestic and continental superpower. Listening to fans, the club have also frozen ticket prices for a third consecutive season. Meanwhile in the Pep Guardiola Stand, 4,000 new flexi season tickets - a pay-as-you-go scheme - have sold out, half of which are for junior fans, with City introducing £10 seats for those who live in the five wards around the ground.
The manager
Is Maresca courageous for following The Man or naive for believing he can? Over to the 46-year-old, who has zero doubt the City job is no chalice laced with poison. "It's fantastic, nice and exciting, and for me, a privilege," he said. "First of all, the most important thing has been that Khaldoon [al-Mubarak, the chair], Hugo [Viana, the director of football] and Ferran [Soriano, the chief executive] all speak the same language in terms of this is a club that has to win games, titles and has to compete, but we also talk about how we can continue to make this club better, season after season." Maresca's CV shows the Championship crown with Leicester, and the Conference League and Club World Cup glory with Chelsea. How he would love to add the Premier League title to that roll of honour at the first time of asking.
Star signing
Rodri's departure offers Anderson an opportunity to run City's midfield. Can he do so? Maresca and Viana obviously believe this or £116m would not have been splurged on the lad from Whitley Bay who could not nail down a starting berth for Newcastle in five years as a senior professional there. At the World Cup there were flashes of a schemer who can spray passes long range - Rodri-style - as well as the shorter, metronomic stuff. What's for sure is that Anderson has a career-defining opportunity in front of him.
Stat attack
Manchester City conceded more league goals from set pieces last season than they had in the previous two campaigns combined. They were costly at times too: the winning goals in their losses at Aston Villa and Newcastle both came from corners, for instance. Maresca's Chelsea conceded from a set play every three league games so his record there was a shade worse than City's in 2025-26. He has work to do.
Set for a breakthrough
Vitor Reis was signed in January 2025 and made four appearances that season. The defender's debut was also forgettable as, then 19, he was hooked at half-time with City trailing 1-0 at Leyton Orient in the FA Cup fourth round. The Brazilian played all of the 3-1 victory in the following round, and was fielded in the 89th-minute of the 2-0 league victory at Leicester in April before his sole other City appearance: a full outing in the 2-0 Club World Cup win over Wydad Casablanca that June. Last season's loan at City's sister club Girona ended in relegation, but Reis is said to have impressed.
World Cup impact
The departed Rodri made real the ultimate fantasy of all players by captaining his country to the World Cup and being so vital to that glory that he was named player of the tournament. Cherki fared less well, making six substitute appearances and one start for a France side that fell, to Spain, in the semi-finals. France's attacking ranks may overflow with quality, but for a player with magic in both boots, that seemed odd.