Krapopolis
11.40pm, BBC Three
This starry-voiced adult cartoon by Rick and Morty creator Dan Harmon quietly dropped on iPlayer last month. Set in ancient Greece, it follows benevolent Tyrannis (Richard Ayoade) - the mortal son of vain goddess Deliria (Hannah Waddingham) and husband Shlub (Matt Berry) - who uses modern ideas as he rules Krapopolis. Served up in fun 20-minute bites, this six-episode bill will race by. Hollie Richardson
Strictly Come Dancing
6.15pm, BBC One
Chris and Amy were the first couple to cha cha their way from the dancefloor (in their Baywatch gear, no less), which means 14 pairs are left in week three of the competition. Lacey and Vito confirmed one dance at the end of last week's show: they'll be getting lively with a samba to Bamboléo by the Gipsy Kings. HR
40 Hits of 1976 at the BBC
8.40pm, BBC Two
Odd year, 1976. Perhaps the record-breaking heat boiled record buyers' brains. How else to explain the UK's best-selling single and Eurovision winner, Save Your Kisses for Me? Or the Wurzels ploughing Combine Harvester to No 1? Thankfully, punk was also battering down the door - along with Abba and Dolly. Ali Catterall
Marble Hall Murders
9.20pm, BBC One
A classy cast and the lure of gossip among pampered literati are keeping Anthony Horowitz's convoluted mystery drama going. Book editor Susan (Lesley Manville), working on a roman à clef set in Crete in 1955, now meets the family of the author, who alleges one of them murdered his grandmother. Everyone is wonderfully barbed. Jack Seale
Saturday Night Live UK
10pm, Sky One
Oh, this is going to be a good one: while his daughter hotfoots it on Strictly, actor/geezer/emerging national treasure Danny Dyer is the host of this edition of the show, which is back after a week off. Music comes from south London singer-songwriter Sasha Keable. HR
Three Women
1.30am, Channel 4
If 1.30am is a little late, this candid drama based on Lisa Taddeo's nonfiction hit about sex and desire is also streamable. In an episode that's all the more resonant given grim events at Cornell, Lina (Betty Gilpin) tells Gia (Shailene Woodley) about a disturbing event from her student past. Hannah J Davies
Film choice
Matchbox the Movie, out now, Apple TV
In the wake of the pink powerhouse that was Barbie, toy giant Mattel is going all-in on adaptations. Before we get the pleasure of Polly Pocket on screen, the line of tiny toy vehicles is given some dramatic spit and polish in Sam Hargrave's breezy caper. Amiable muscleman Jon Cena plays CIA covert agent Sean, who returns to his home town for a funeral and reconnects with four childhood friends known as the Matchbox Gang, including Jessica Biel's paramedic - and youthful crush - Aimee. Unfortunately, Sean is the fall guy after a nuclear warhead vanishes, so his mates are thrown into his globe-trotting world of spies, close-quarter violence and, naturally, shiny fast cars. Simon Wardell
Animals, out now, Netflix
Ben Affleck's knotty kidnap thriller was put on hold in 2024 after it clashed with Spike Lee's similarly themed Highest 2 Lowest, itself a remake of a Kurosawa classic. It's finally here, with Affleck casting himself (original pick Matt Damon was stuck on an island in the Med) as an attorney standing for LA mayor and Kerry Washington as his wife. The plot revolves round their son being taken for ransom, as moral and political calculations seriously muddy the waters. Gillian Anderson walks off with her scenes as a cool, collected English fixer called upon to help. SW
Poor Things, 10pm, Channel 4
A risk-taking performance from Emma Stone is at the heart of this deeply weird yarn from Yorgos Lanthimos. She plays Bella, a young woman who died but was revived with the brain of her unborn baby by the Frankenstein-esque Godwin (Willem Dafoe). As she learns to walk and talk, she yearns to discover more about life. Lothario Duncan Wedderburn (a hilariously louche Mark Ruffalo) has designs on being her svengali - but Bella has a mind of her own. A delightful, disconcerting comedy adapted from Alasdair Gray's novel, set in a stunning, not-quite-realistic Victorian era. SW
Red Rooms, 11.20pm, Film4
In Montreal, Canada, a man goes on trial for the murder of three teenage girls, the torture and killing of whom he had filmed for paying customers on the dark web. Pascal Plante's increasingly disturbing psychological drama follows the proceedings - and the media frenzy surrounding it - through the eyes of model Kelly-Anne (Juliette Gariépy), who is a regular attendee at court. But why is she there? Is she a groupie of the (clearly guilty) accused? A true-crime obsessive? Or something darker? Gariépy's enigmatic performance keeps us guessing almost to the end. SW
Live sport
Premier League Football: Arsenal v Leeds, 11am, TNT Sports 1 Man Utd v Tottenham is at 5pm on Sky Sports Main Event.
Prem Rugby Union: Northampton v Bath, 3pm, TNT Sports 1 Saracens v Bristol follows at 5.15pm.