China Miéville, author
I was sideswiped by Giada Scodellaro's Ruins, Child. A brilliant, strange book that challenged me in the most exhilarating way, with its fractured language and dream-cinema visions, the sense it bestowed of walking through a corridor full of echoes. Echoes of a less elliptical but no-less political kind haunt Jordy Rosenberg's astounding Night Night Fawn. I guess you could call it a family novel? But it's at least as much about fascism as it is about the family - as well as about unsettling linkages between the two. And for horrors and rage in a nonfiction register, Jonas Marvin's The Breaking of the English Working Class is an indispensable - and beautifully written - essay on decades of structural, economic and psychic violence. The feeling it provoked in me brought to mind John Berger's phrase "undefeated despair".
The Rouse by China Miéville is published by Picador (£35). To support the Guardian, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.
Linda, Guardian reader
I was totally immersed in Whale Fall by Elizabeth O'Connor, a beautifully written story describing a short time in the life of a young woman and her fishing community on an island off the coast of Wales in the 1930s. The simplicity of this tale is underpinned with intriguing moral issues when two anthropologists visit the island to study the lives and history of the islanders. The book is the most poetic I've read in a while.
Derek Owusu, author
I've enjoyed so many books recently. Two I now claim as favourites of all time. The first is Beloved by Toni Morrison. Incredibly late to the party because I was resistant to reading her again having had such a hard time with Sula. But Beloved, in my opinion, is the perfect novel. The second is Pedro Páramo by Juan Rulfo, one of the founding texts of the Latin American tradition of magical realism. It was hard work but so enjoyable, a reminder that challenging can be fun and that it's possible to tell a story in a variety of ways. Last, I want to mention The Bridge of San Luis Rey by Thornton Wilder. I've only just finished it, so coherent feelings are still working themselves out, but in the mix I know there is admiration, pleasure, something life affirming and something ineffable sparked by the religious elements of the novel. I'm almost certain it's going to join the others as one of my favourites. I'm having a great run.
The Recovery House by Derek Owusu is published by Merky Books (£16.99). To support the Guardian, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.
Fiona, Guardian reader
In the day, Mario Vargas Llosa by Gerald Martin, a giant ship of a book which, at nearly a thousand pages, will probably steer me through the remains of 2026. In the night, when I cannot sleep, I do as I always do around the date of my birthday: a re-read of all of Jean Rhys. With her, I am on the moonlit deck of the ship and we watch the darkness of a deep sea rush by. For sanity, The Practice of Not Thinking by Ryunosuke Koike: the antidote to botched CBT therapy. For inspiration, For Now by Eileen Myles, concerning the loss of part of their archive and the struggle to hold on to a rent controlled apartment of 40 years. And My Life on the Road by Gloria Steinem. Of course.
Sebastian Barry, author
If anyone is in a mood to have their psyches calmed and their reading synapses restored, then The Last Chronicle of Barset by Anthony Trollope is the cat's pyjamas. I was nodding my head recently when Marlon James was saying somewhere that he rated Trollope above Dickens. Not that D is any slouch. I am rereading a book I read for work, and now again just because it's so excellently done, Army Life in a Black Regiment, by Thomas Wentworth Higginson. Emerson said it was a masterpiece by a writer not known for writing masterpieces(!) The Penguin Classics reissue in the late 1990s also has his correspondence with Emily Dickinson and an account of his one meeting with her, revelatory on many levels. She spoke as she wrote. I was also very admiring of a little book of poems by Kayleigh Jayshree called Mango and Starblush, which Miss Dickinson might have called true poems.
The Newer World by Sebastian Barry is published by Faber (£20). To support the Guardian, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.