Pro Ref admitted Erling Haaland's winner in Sunday's Manchester derby should not have been allowed after the video assistant referee ruled Enzo Fernández was not interfering with play in the build-up. The elite officiating body will review the decision and has contacted Manchester United.
Haaland's 60th minute goal for Manchester City at Old Trafford was initially ruled offside before the VAR's intervention. It came after Josko Gvardiol's cross hit Patrick Dorgu's boot, passed Fernández and the United defender Lisandro Martínez, and was finished by the City No 9. VAR decided Fernández was not interfering despite Martínez marking the midfielder.
A Pro Ref statement said: "Following the incident in the 60th minute of Sunday's Premier League fixture between Manchester United and Manchester City at Old Trafford, we can provide clarification regarding Erling Haaland's awarded goal.
"The on-field decision was offside against Haaland - that was checked by VAR and he was found to be in an onside position.
"In the same attack, it was established that Fernández did not play the ball and therefore that makes any offside offence subjective, however, on this occasion, the VAR did not recognise the likely impact of his position and should have recommended an on-field review.
"Contact has been made with Manchester United this evening to acknowledge what we deem is an error of judgment. A review of the incident will take place."
After the match but before the Pro Ref statement, an unhappy Michael Carrick expressed concern over Haaland's winner.
"At the time I hadn't totally seen it. But the explanation I got was he wasn't interfering with play, so I just don't get it," the United manager said. "I can't understand how they're trying to help referees and putting so many layers behind them with so many people, screens, and so many whatever offices to try and come up with the right decisions.
"If that's how the rules are interpreted, that you're not interfering with play because you've thrown yourself at the ball six yards from goal and pretty much nearly touched it, which then Lisandro has to react from - it's worrying if that's really how the game's seen by those who are officiating it."
Carrick was asked if an apology from Pro Ref would be welcome. "Yeah, that'd be great, that. Yeah, I can't wait for that one," he said. "I don't really know how you go and get another explanation on that one. I think we all understand what that rule means [regarding interfering with play], and it's pretty obvious. It's as obvious as it gets."
Enzo Maresca, though, was adamant that Fernández was not interfering. "Yeah - and the fourth official said Erling is onside," the City manager said.
The 199th Manchester derby's other controversial decision was Phil Foden's 23rd-minute red card. The forward kicked Bruno Fernandes in the stomach, but only after United's captain had kicked him. Maresca backed Michael Oliver's red card but suggested the referee should also have sent off Fernandes.
"Phil Foden red card is a red card, but I also think it is red card from Bruno," City's manager said. "Reviewing the action, it is a clear red card for Phil because it is a reaction but you can also see Bruno's [action]."
City now have 12 points, second only to Arsenal on goal difference, while United have only four points and are 13th. "We will get there, I'm convinced of that," Carrick said.
"We haven't got as many points as we wanted and we should have. We've got to accept that and take that. It doesn't change us moving forward and our hopes for the season and what we can achieve as a team. We've made really good strides over a period of time and we will continue to do that."
Carrick was asked about the pre-game protest against the club's move to eradicate ticket touts that some believe to be draconian. United said on Friday that 685 accounts had been subject to a ban and 464 supporters had received a reduced sanction or final warning.
Carrick said: "The details in terms of all what goes behind it, I'm not always in line to get to the bottom of it, but I definitely appreciate the supporters.
"If they do feel [unhappy] in certain ways then, of course, we want to try everything to make them happy. That's part of performances on the pitch and off the pitch. That's obvious. They're a huge part of this football club. They're everything for this football club."
Inside the stadium The Red Army hung a banner over the tunnel that said, "The Way You Treat Us Is A Disgrace." All usual banners were removed from the Stretford End.