Rodri is handed the World Cup by Trump and Infantino. Trump hangs around at the side of the Spain squad as they celebrate before Infantino quietly ushers him to the side. Messi applauds is tears, what a champion. On the podium Spain celebrate wildly, as they should.
Argentina get their medals and Messi is in tears as he contemplates what is almost certainly his final World Cup match. He faces the Argentina crowd who sing to him, many of them in tears themselves.
Carlos Alcaraz is in the stands looking significantly happier than when he won any of his grand slams. And he didn't look disappointed when he won those ones.
Argentina are not taking this well: Molina punched a Spanish sub as he ran on to the field to celebrate. Because how dare someone celebrate winning the World Cup?
The hafltime show lasted just over 27 minutes. So we'll have seen Animal drumming for almost as long as we'll watch extra time. I know that's incredibly strained but I'm killing time until Trump grabs the trophy at the presentation ceremony and runs away laughing.
Phil Udell writes in: "I'm a big fan of Coldplay's efforts to be an ethically sound modern stadium band but how does that sit with allying themselves with such a questionable organisation as Fifa, to say nothing of their pal in the White House?"
I imagine they'll point out that the halftime show was to promote Fifa's charity efforts. But ... good point.
Nathan North: "If the score is still 0-0 at the end of extra time, instead of the lottery of penalties, I think the only fair thing to do would be to give the World Cup to the winner of the third place match."
Trump wasn't shown on the video screen at the stadium during the halftime show - Fifa is smart enough not to offer a distraction. We did see Carlos Alcaraz, Serena Williams and Zidane though - none of whom were booed. How could you boo Carlos anyway?
Facundo Iglesia is in Buenos Aires for us. Here's how things are going there:
A small screen hanging outside a travel agency in downtown Buenos Aires draws a crowd of hundreds. If the sound is even on, it's drowned out by the monotone drone of vuvuzelas, the crackle of firecrackers, and the fans chanting: "El que no salta es español" ("Anyone who doesn't jump is a Spaniard") and the better-known but less appropriate version, "El que no salta es un inglés" ("Anyone who doesn't jump is an Englishman"). Thousands across the capital are watching the final this way - people in Albiceleste jerseys wandering the area around the Obelisco, catching glimpses of TVs inside or outside businesses, jumping and shouting as if they were at East Rutherford Stadium in New Jersey.
But those scattered pockets of fans carry a well-known risk: spoilers. Broadcast delays across TV channels and radio stations are a running annoyance in Argentina, and a group of supporters reacting to a play will sometimes tip off another group nearby - before the play has even happened for them. A respectful round of applause, for instance - later revealed to be for Lisandro "Licha" Martínez leaving the pitch - rippled down the block a full beat before the screen outside an empanada shop caught up. "It's annoying - that's why I'm watching the screen with commentary on my phone," says Carla Lucía del Pardo, a 31-year-old pastry chef. "That way, I gain five seconds." For Del Pardo, Argentina is playing "well, but too calm." "They're defending the goal, but not really going on the attack," she added.
Gillian Forrester: "You did not mention that the fabulous Gustavo Dudamel was conducting! He's moving to the NY Phil this fall (and is Venezuelan, FYI)."
Matthew Leung: "I hope that is the only World Cup half-time show I ever have to see in my life. 17 minutes of underwhelming, cringeworthy crap. I am a BTS fan, but this wasn't really a great ad for them."
Brigid Brennan: "Did I hear some boos for Pele when he appeared on screen? (From Argentinian fans, presumably). It was a choice to have a heavy Brazilian influence in front of a pro Argentinian crowd - Ronaldo, Ronaldinho & Pele."
Philip Reed: "For three decades soccer fandom in the US, both MLS and especially international club, has had a strong undercurrent of, 'This is the sport that it's OK to care about and still be somewhat artsy'. It's also why there's little overlap of say watching Premier League games at 8am with the "soccer mom" culture of piling the kids in the SUV and remembering to bring the orange slices for halftime. They're just two different sets of cultural signifiers. Maybe this World Cup will merge the two a bit."
Leo Addor: "The thing was going well until they brought on Ted Lasso and then Bieber. Bieber seemed like a homeless guy who cut up his own clothes and then wandered onto the pitch to play guitar about some weird Christian bullshit (which is basically accurate).
"Burna Boy seemed like he was contractually obligated to stay at least 1/2 feet away from Shakira at all times. Their dynamic was weird.
"They showed Dua Lipa watching afterwards. She seemed to think that she could've done better, and well, she's right."
And so, we go back to the football. Were the professional singers who performed professional? Yes! Were the cute kids who performed cute? Yes! Did anyone ask for this? No! Did this add to the World Cup final? Not really! Will it convert neutral American fans to soccer? No! Would an exciting game without a big interruption in the middle do a better job of that? Yes! What I'm saying is that they should just have shown highlights of England 6-4 France from yesterday instead.
A kids choir from Staten Island - who says nothing good comes out of Staten Island - are joined by Kermit and Miss Piggy next. Shakira has such affection for Staten Island that she comes along to join them. And Chris Martin, who is curating this show. This is very wholesome and nice and professionally done. Does the World Cup final need it ... probably not?
Bieber shows his improv skills by adding "World Cup" to the lyrics of his song. They don't pay him the big bucks for nothing (he's playing for free, for charity)
I am running the TV broadcast of this halftime show alongside watching it live at the stadium and, unsurprisingly, this stuff absolutely does not translate live. It took til halfway through Seven Nation Army for me to realize Animal was playing the drums.
Here comes Ted Lasso and Coach Beard to introduce ...Justin Bieber. Bieber is 32 now, so is unlikely to win a professional football contract. Good voice though!
BTS are their usual professional, excellent selves as they belt out Dynamite. They may have played one or two stadium gigs in their time. They get more air time than Madonna, but fewer Brazilian World Cup winners.
Animal is on the drums as they play Seven Nation Army. OK, this is now an excellent halftime show. Forget any previous criticism I had of it. In fact, just stop it here. After a quick Viking Row, BTS are on - with no Animal.
And we're on Madonna is on a car driven by Ronaldo (the Brazilian one) and ... Ronaldinho. I hope they have travel insurance because that car doesn't look that roadworthy. They're driving on to the field now. Ronaldo looks very happy to be there.
They've rolled out a big tarp at the New York New Jersey Stadium as they prepare the field for the performance. It's been a great day for tarps at today's final.
Just a reminder that the halftime show will last 25 to 30 minutes. Around 11 minutes for the actual show and the rest of the time to set up the stage and then take it all down. There are worries that the added down time for players could lead to injuries as muscles cool down due to inactivity. On the upside, they'll get to hear Justin Bieber sing for about 90 seconds.
The list of artists includes:
Shakira; Burna Boy; BTS; Madonna; Kermit and Miss Piggy; conductor Gustavo Dudamel with musicians from the New York Philharmonic and the Simon Bolivar Symphony Orchestra of Venezuela; dance troupe Ghetto Kids; Emmanuel Kelly; PS 22 Chorus (cute kids from a local school).
The half-time show approaches, which means uber-warmup man Michael "Let's Get Ready To Rumble" Buffer is back, and he is yelling very loud. Talk about someone who should be booed
The argument for the halftime show seems to be that it's what new fans want. James Massing of Live Nation, who are helping put on the show, told the BBC that sports events need to change things up because they are "competing with any other live experience - going to the museum, going to the theatre, going to the cinema".
I'm pretty sure no one going to the museum expects a halftime show though, and people are still happy to queue up to see the Mona Lisa without one. I suspect that this is also a push by people who think that US fans will refuse to watch a big event unless it has a halftime show, even though plenty of big sporting events, from the NBA finals to the World Series don't have halftime shows. I actually think the appeal of soccer to many Americans is that it's not the NFL, in the same way that many European fans enjoy the NFL because it's not soccer.
And people expect a halftime show at the Super Bowl because it's the Super Bowl, not because they expect - or want - one at a World Cup final. Added to that, the best Super Bowl halftime shows often provide commentary on the state of America, from Bad Bunny's hymn to immigrants at this year's Super Bowl to Beyonce's black panther tribute in 2016. Somehow, I doubt Gianni and friends are going to allow Shakira to sneak in references to the Iran War today.
On the upside, all the artists are performing for free, there will be a kids choir and the show is meant to support Fifa's education fund.
Madrid's Plaza de Colón, famous for its massive Spanish flag, is absolutely rammed as the match begins. Police are turning people away from the barriers that have been installed around the square, but the mood inside it somewhere between expectant and buoyant.
No one wants to hex the game but hopes are high.
"It's a historic moment and it's really exciting," said Katy, 18, who was two years old the last time Spain won the World Cup. "I'm obviously hoping that Spain win and I think it'll be 3-2 to Spain."
Miguel Hinojal Vicente, 37, had come to Madrid from Toledo as much for the party atmosphere as for the match itself.
Unlike Katy, he had vivid memories of Spain's last World Cup triumph. "Shit, it was just a magical thing," he said. "But, to tell the truth, I'm more of a Atleti fan than a Spain fan."
His friend Raquel Garcia was a little more enthusiastic - and optimistic.
She predicted a 3-0 win for Spain, with two goals in the first half and one in the second.
But it was about more than just football for her. "This is about the hopes of a country and it's about unity," she said. "Events like these bring people together and they make people happy."
Rusty Shpork gets in touch: "Are any of the online prediction markets taking bets on the exact minute Trump nods off? I'm going with the 27th minute, after he's exhausted himself rage-bleating on Truth Social during the first commercial break about the large number of "probably illegal" Latinos in the stadium. If Spain win, Trump will probably try to present the trophy to Messi, anyway. Brand recognition, yada yada."
The TV cameras show Will Ferrell in the stands before cutting to Pharell Williams. I don't know if that was deliberate but the Fereell/Pharell cut was sonically pleasing.
A little more on Trump's appearance at the final today. He wasn't booed by the crowd, but perhaps Fifa knows if they don't show him, he can't be booed:
And the match kicks off only six minutes late. We'll be updating periodically here but the actual match action will here on our match liveblog. We'll be back for the halftime show: