Yorkshire are marching on here, as the new ball proves no magic bullet.
Back to Grace Road for a moment, I just read the Regulator's last few paragraphs again. Leicestershire's points reduction was less harsh than it might have been because: they admitted that the pitch was substandard; this was their first rating of Below Average, Poor or Unfit in the last 24 months; the club cooperated fully with the investigation, there was no intention to deliberately create a pitch with uneven bounce, and the extreme weather conditions. "This was not a case of cheating."
A cheer on the Somerset balcony, on the pitch, as Somerset think they have a run out at the non-striker's end, but no. Kuldeep Yadav might be noting the dust that is coming off the pitch. And now: the new ball.
Is the salt in the wound extra salty? Dom Bess reaches a fabulous, patient fifty off 130 balls, with four fours. Yorkshire's lead now 201.
"I mean, as a fan, as a player, and as somewhere that put so much time and investment into me as a player, of course when they're not playing me and this team I want them to do well," Bess told the Yorkshire Post before this game.
"But when it comes to this game it's the complete opposite. I want them to get smacked, which is the way it is, I guess."
A fabulous no-risk strategy by Durham, who appear to have served up a batting paradise. Adam Hose reached the third hundred of his career, and bashed about a couple Test bowlers in the process, but has been one of two wickets picked up by Ben Stokes this morning, who now has four for 68. Worcs 336-7 trail by 129.
They will restart at midday at Canterbury, with Kent needing another 56.
Marcus Harris was in reflective mood last night , speaking about the young:
"I've spoken a lot to Rocky Flintoff out in the field. You know, young guys now, they want to get everywhere at a million miles an hour. They put themselves under a lot of pressure, but we definitely got the talent there, so that's not an issue. I thought Rock had a really good week last week, and then that's cricket for you.
and the old Jimmy Anderson "He's unbelievable. I just can't believe he keeps playing. The amount of tape that he's got on his legs, I'm not sure if you've seen it, but there's a lot of stuff holding him together. He's bowled unbelievably again this week, so it's been a privilege to play with him."
Tribe made his first century of the year a big one, seventh out at The Oval on a pitch that has calmed down dramatically since day one. It will be interesting to see what Surrey's rich roll call of batters make of it.
The Yorkshire lead is creeping towards 200 here. The new ball is due in seven overs but Somerset really don't want to wait until then to break through.
At Grace Road, where the teams might have been going through the motions even without last night's points bombshell, Leicestershire have manged to take a couple of Hampshire wickets - one of them Nick Gubbins for a season-topping 133.
Huge applause for the 100 partnership between Hill and Bess. Pretorius has his hands on his hips. A 17 run over. Overton takes the ball and strides back to his mark on the edge of the shade from the Howard Stand.
This match is drifting away from Somerset as Hill and Bess reprise the Overton and Pretorius partnership. Yorkshire's lead is 151 and Bess and Hill are having fun.
I have been corrected by the Yorkshire press box, the filming at Grace Road was not for a Virender Sehwag biopic but a Sourav Ganguly biopic. Apparently the team have already filmed for five days at Headingley, at Lord's, and at Scarborough.
Suddenly the spectators in the East Stand pick up their bags and scurry up the aisle. The rain has arrived. This was Craig Overton last night after yet another monster performance:"It's been a great season for me - and those personal milestones are nice. But it doesn't really mean much if we don't win the Championship."
Digging in the full report from the cricket regulator, is a nugget that the groundsman's preparation was hampered not only by the 35 degree heat but also "an unscheduled Bollywood filming event four days before, and I wasn't allowed to work on the pitch. I wasn't allowed to cover it or anything."
Leicestershire pleaded guilty to a poor pitch but said they had prepared the best quality pitch that it could for the match.
The players are going through their warm-ups in the Headingley sunshine, and there is just one bobble hat to be seen. Quite a few coming through the gates on what might be the last day's cricket here this season.
It was advantage Warwickshire at the top but perhaps the most significant action of the day came off the pitch and at the bottom, with Leicestershire all but relegated after a points deduction.
The Cricket Regulator had charged Leicestershire after the Grace Road pitch was rated as poor for last month's win against Glamorgan. The cricket discipline panel has upheld the charge, leading to the deduction of the 19 points picked up for the victory plus eight more as a penalty. A Leicestershire statement said "the club is reviewing its position and considering all available options", but the deduction left them bottom of the table, 38 points adrift of the last safe spot. With Hampshire 225 ahead with seven wickets standing, Leicestershire's hopes in what is now a must-win match are slim.
Warwickshire flourish a 19-point hand on the table and wait after a second two-day victory in succession. Essex, further weakened by overnight substitutions to Shane Snater and Tom Westley, gave them the upper hand by conceding another 40 runs for the last wicket, thanks largely to an unbeaten 88 from Sam Hain. The Indian spinner Manav Suthar, with five for 75, and Chris Woakes, with three for 33, were too hot for Essex and Warwickshire easily knocked off the 133 needed.
The morning bell at Chelmsford was rung by the BBC's Dick Davies, retiring after 31 years covering Essex cricket. Up at Headingley, Craig Overton continued his one-man attempt to haul Somerset over the line. His 64 not out, full of humpty and grace, rescued his team from the doldrums of 86 for eight, in companionship with Migael Pretorius, who found his long-lost batting form with a free-flowing 58.
Overton was last man out to Ben Cliff's, whose astonishing eight for 76 were the best bowling figures for a Yorkshireman at Headingley since Graham Stevenson's eight for 57 in 1980. He led Yorkshire off grinning, applauding teammates behind.
Overton soon spoiled their fun, nobbling Will Luxton's middle stump with his second ball, and removing Adam Lyth a couple of overs later. Jonny Bairstow came and went to a Nureyev catch at cover by Archie Vaughan but George Hill and Dom Bess stopped the rot with an unbroken seventh-wicket stand of 74 as spectators in the East Stand enjoyed some afternoon sun to stretch Yorkshire's lead to 139.
At Hove, Nottinghamshire were held up by an obdurate Sussex, who picked up the only Division One batting point of the round thanks to half centuries for Tom Clark, Charlie Tear and Tom Price.
Kent need 56 to beat Lancashire and get their promotion points on the board. Zak Crawley (84) and Matt Milnes (40 not out) ushered Kent to a first-innings lead of 53, before Milnes had a go with the ball and helped chisel Lancashire out for 192. Sam Northeast and Tawanda Muyeye took Kent towards a good night's sleep.
Asa Tribe's first hundred of the season, on a wicket where 20 wickets had fallen the day before, eased Glamorgan's relegation nerves, even before the Leicestershire news.
Good morning! It's a beautiful one in Headingley, delicious autumn sun, but not in Leicester, where they are coming to terms with a brutal 27 point penalty from the Cricket Regulator last night that leaves them all but relegated. The club are "reviewing their position" and "considering all available options" but it looks pretty bleak for the Foxes. We'll chew this over as we follow Somerset's progress against Yorkshire and the other games round the grounds. Do join us.