The writer, comedian and conservationist Bill Oddie has died aged 85. Having come to prominence with the comedy group The Goodies, Oddie later established himself as an authority on wildlife, presenting television series including the BBC's Springwatch and Autumnwatch.
Oddie's agent paid tribute to his "intelligence and wit". In a statement, David Foster said: "It is with deep sadness that I announce the passing of Bill Oddie, the country's best-loved birder. Bill was a multitalented celebrity - wildlife presenter, broadcaster, comedian, writer, songwriter, musician and conservationist. Yet it was never fame that he valued.
"Instead he encouraged us to respect and protect the environment. He taught us the wonder of it. He protested, lobbied and campaigned for it. He led the way and people of all ages and backgrounds responded to his call. And such a massive contribution to conservation will never be forgotten.
"As Bill's agent I witnessed close-hand his intelligence and wit. He was my friend and it was an honour and a privilege to represent him for so many years. I will miss him terribly. My thoughts and love are with Bill's wife, Laura, and his daughters Bonnie, Kate and Rosie, who have asked not to be contacted at this sad time. Please respect their wishes."
Oddie was born in Rochdale in Lancashire, and grew up in Birmingham, later studying at Cambridge University. It was at Cambridge that he met Tim Brooke-Taylor and Graeme Garden, with whom he would form the sketch group The Goodies. After various TV projects, Oddie appeared alongside Brooke-Taylor and Garden in the TV show The Goodies for 10 years from 1970 to 1980. The show was revived by ITV for a 1981 Christmas special and a six-part series that aired in 1982.
As well as creating and performing comic musical numbers with The Goodies, including The Funky Gibbon and Black Pudding Bertha (The Queen of Northern Soul), Oddie's music projects included a role in the English National Opera production of The Mikado in the late 1980s.
An avid birder, Oddie made forays into natural history television in the 1970s and 1980s, going on to present wildlife series for the BBC and publishing several books on conservation.
Oddie had depression and bipolar disorder. In 2015, he told the Guardian that he had "inherited the same genetic flaw" as his mother, who was diagnosed with schizophrenia but may have also had bipolar disorder.
In September 2020, Oddie said on X that he had been "very ill most of this summer. Lithium toxicity. Almost fatal! I am still here but very confused about most things! But then aren't many of us. IT fuddles my brain. Confusion. Will I return? I Really dunno. I do hope so. Please wish me luck. XX." Lithium is prescribed as a mood stabiliser.
He said in 2014 that he still felt a lingering sadness that his days on Springwatch had been cut short, and he rarely watched the programme.
"I very much miss it, but when I do see it, it brings back many happy memories and I like to think I contributed to its success," he said.
"It's still so well loved and helps encourage people to enjoy the natural world. That's all to the good because I fear so many people wear earphones for their phones and music players that increasingly they miss out on everyday joys like birdsong.
"My plea to people would be to 'go naked' occasionally - take off those earpieces so you hear nature and, of course, birdsong. You may not realise how precious it is until it's gone."
The RSPCA's chief executive, Jo Rowland, said: "Everyone at the RSPCA is deeply saddened by the loss of our former vice-president Bill Oddie OBE.
"While his comedy, music and, of course, work with The Goodies delighted so many, his tireless commitment to British wildlife will define so much of his extraordinary life.
"Bill was an exceptional and steadfast champion for the natural world, whose passion for birds and wildlife was truly infectious.
"He campaigned tirelessly alongside his many friends at the RSPCA, including taking the fight to governments against plans to cull badgers.
"I know many of our wildlife rescuers were inspired into animal welfare by Bill's groundbreaking broadcasting work and incredible knowledge of British birds, which brought the wonders of nature into millions of homes across the country."
She said "nature has lost one of its best friends, fiercest champions and most iconic defenders".
Oddie is survived by his wife, Laura, and three daughters - Rosie, from his marriage to Laura, and Kate and Bonnie from his first marriage to the jazz musician Jean Hart.