34 min: Makhanya continues to impress on the ball, keeping Rangers ticking ... Gassama overdoes it on the left, dribbling out of play when he had the chance to cut back.
Naderi finds the ball in the left channel, hooks it to Kelsy inside the area, and he finds Neil inside the D with plenty of space. The midfielder is calm amid the madness, locating the bottom left corner. Derek McInnes is a happy, happy man. That goal has been coming.
21 min: Gassama twists and turns on the left for Rangers, sending in a dangerous low ball into the area ... it's cleared away but Rangers have a free-kick from the right.
15 min: Huge chance. Penrice whips in a delicious cross form the left and Johnstone flaps at the ball ... it drops for Min-su inside the area, he connects well, but Scales gets a vital touch to deny Rangers the opener. Celtic's keeper has made an iffy start here.
13 min: Time for Rangers to go long with a throw, Sterling to send it in from the right ... the ball works it way back to Sterling, whose low cross is blocked for a corner.
11 min: Celtic push down the left-hand side, with Tierney ready for a long throw ... but Fernandez heads away. Rangers counter but Donovan wins it back for Celtic, the move closing with Durán dragging a tame shot wide.
Sam Johnstone, who has joined Celtic on loan from Wolves, made his debut in the league this week and keeps his place. The Hoops have made four changes from midweek, with Kieran Tierney, Cameron Carter-Vickers, Benjamin Nygren and Camilo Durán all starting today. Haissem Hassan, my World Cup hero, must settle for a spot on the bench.
There won't be any Celtic support at Ibrox today - the SPFL announced this month that away fans will not attend Old Firm derbies in its competitions this season. There was fan disorder when the two sides met in March in the Scottish Cup.
Hello, hello, hello and welcome to the first Old Firm derby of the season. Forget the league, where Celtic have a 100% record, and forget Europe, where there's been serious misery for both sides. We go to the League Cup, won by St Mirren last time round, Wilfried Nancy's side beaten in the final. He was gone not long after, prompting the return of Martin O'Neill.
This'll be the first time Derek McInnes comes up against Celtic as Rangers' manager, with his side having won four on the bounce after a difficult start. It'll also be McInnes' first meeting with Celtic since that day in May, when his Hearts side couldn't hold on to claim the title. We won't have that level of drama today ... but it should still be fun. Kick-off's at 12pm BST.