Gianni Infantino's authority has been dealt a fresh blow after Carlos Cordeiro, one of his senior advisers, resigned with immediate effect in protest at proposals to sell a stake in the World Cup.
In the latest embarrassment for Infantino, who saw European FAs threaten to boycott future Fifa tournaments on Thursday, the former US Soccer chief Cordeiro criticised "a bad deal for football" and pointed out that the global governing body already sits on huge amounts of debt-free reserves.
"I cannot stand by while Fifa considers selling a stake in the World Cup," Cordeiro said in his resignation statement. "I had no involvement in this proposal, and I oppose it unequivocally. It is a bad deal for Fifa's member associations, a bad deal for football, and a bad deal for the long-term future of the game."
Cordeiro has worked for Fifa since 2021 as senior adviser to Infantino. He also operated as a senior adviser to the White House taskforce on this summer's World Cup.
In resigning he said Fifa "already has the financial capacity to provide [additional financial] support from existing resources". He added that Fifa would be "mortgaging football's future without any compelling justification" if it sold off a permanent stake.
In addition, Cordeiro questioned the lack of transparency in Fifa's process. "Why this deal?" he asked. "Why now? What oversight exists? Who benefits? Was there a competitive process? What governance will be in place? What will investors ultimately gain, and at what cost to football?"
Cordeiro's exit was followed by hefty criticism of Infantino from Fifa's chief operating officer, Kevin Lamour, who told the Associated Press: "It is the project of one person. Not only must this project not go ahead ... but the time has now come for football political leaders to ask themselves the right questions and make the right decisions."
It adds to the pressure growing on Infantino and Fifa, which is facing calls for an urgent review of its governance after insisting that the planned World Cup sell-off will continue despite the threat of a boycott from all 55 European members.
In a strongly worded statement issued on Friday morning, the Asian Football Confederation backed Uefa's and Concacaf's opposition to the creation of a new commercial company, Fifa Forward Enterprise (FFE), saying it "cannot realistically achieve the necessary broad consensus and unity required to move forward", and urging Fifa to "undertake an urgent review of its governance and decision-making framework".
Fifa had attempted to double down on its position overnight, releasing a statement at 4am UK time saying "we will proceed with this consultation process to ensure that each MA [member association] has the ability to express its vote based on facts," but it is now clear Infantino is facing united opposition to his proposals from around the globe.
Uefa, Concacaf and the AFC constitute 143 of Fifa's 211 members, so if their coalition remains united there is no prospect of Infantino getting the votes he needs. The 56-year-old's position as Fifa president is also under threat for the first time since he was elected in 2016, unless he backs down quickly.
While stopping short of matching Uefa's boycott the AFC went further than Concacaf in clearly stating that the FFE proposal should be dropped. "The AFC stands in solidarity with Uefa and Concacaf in expressing serious concerns over Fifa's proposal to introduce private investment into Fifa's flagship competitions and the decision-making process around FFE," its statement read. "The fact that the situation has reached the point where the real possibility of a Fifa World Cup boycott has entered public discourse should concern everyone who cares about the future of our game.
"Football should never have been placed in such a position. Against this backdrop, and in light of the clear positions expressed by Uefa and Concacaf as well as the unprecedented divisions that have emerged across the football world, the AFC believes that the proposed FFE cannot realistically achieve the necessary broad consensus and unity required to move forward.
"The Fifa World Cup is the pinnacle of global football and derives its strength from the participation of all Confederations and the world's leading football nations. Any proposal that risks undermining the unity and universal character of the competition must be reconsidered."
The AFC echoed Uefa and Concacaf's complaints about a lack of consultation from Fifa, making clear that it is not the first time confederations and the Fifa council have been excluded from major decisions, most notably hosting arrangements for the 2030 and 2034 World Cups.
"The AFC sees this moment as a catalyst for strengthening institutional practices," the statement continued. "While every Fifa MA must have the opportunity to consider and determine proposals affecting the future of world football, meaningful democracy is not measured solely by the opportunity to vote.
"It begins with transparent governance, timely consultation, informed deliberation and genuine participation throughout the decision-making process.
"The AFC calls upon Fifa to undertake an urgent review of its governance and decision-making framework to ensure that proposals of global significance are developed through proper consultation, meaningful engagement and appropriate oversight by Fifa's statutory bodies."
Fifa had attempted to blame media reporting for the widespread opposition to its scheme, but it is now clear that will not wash with most of its member associations.
"We respect the feedback and concern aired in public and reaffirm our commitment to an open and democratic consultation," a Fifa statement read. "Our planned consultation process was disrupted by incorrect media reports. We will proceed with this consultation process to ensure that each MA has the ability to express its vote based on facts.
"FFE has been proposed solely to ensure that all Fifa member associations have the opportunity to take meaningful ownership of the commercial opportunity of football in their respective countries, and that this does not come at the cost of either the spirit or the governance of Fifa or football itself.
"Nobody is selling football. This is not something Fifa would ever entertain. Everyone has the right to express their opposition and to seek further clarification but no single entity can claim to represent all 211 MAs around the world. Each MA should be allowed to review the proposal and have a say in shaping their own future. These are the democratic principles of Fifa."
If Fifa was to refuse to back down, the first step of the threatened European boycott would come at next month's Under-20 Women's World Cup in Poland, with senior Women's World Cup qualifiers to follow in October.