The champagne is on ice in Warwickshire but probably not for much longer. Fourteen wickets fell on the opening day at Edgbaston and 10 of them belonged to relegation scufflers Leicestershire who won the toss in late September sunshine and decided to bat first. A couple of hours later and the Foxes were bowled out for just 125. Baby-faced assassin Ethan Bamber continued his fine season with the ball, the 27-year-old took four for 42 to go level with Hampshire's Kyle Abbott as the leading wicket-taker in Division One this year. It was the seventh innings in succession that the Bears have routed their opponents for under 200. They finished the day five runs ahead with six wickets in hand and have at least a few digits on the trophy.
Asa Tribe scored his second century in successive innings as Glamorgan reached 318 for three against Essex in Cardiff. The bowling point Essex picked up is likely enough to see Leicestershire relegated. An asterisk comes in the form of the appeal the chief executive Emma White confirmed the Midlands club had lodged with the independent Cricket Discipline Panel after they were handed a 27-point deduction for a poor pitch in their match against Glamorgan in the ninth round.
Any chance of a Mexican standoff in the race for the title was de-escalated by Surrey racking up 327 for four against second-placed Somerset. Dan Lawrence going to his sixth century of the campaign with a howitzer six into the stands off Jack Leach. The sun setting along with Somerset's hopes of a hoodoo breaking Championship title late in the day at Taunton.
At Trent Bridge, third-placed Nottinghamshire slipped from a well-placed 172 for four to finish on 242for nine against Yorkshire and in the battle of the south coast Hampshire slipped to 55for four in reply to Sussex's 244.
In Division Two, Northamptonshire's hopes of promotion were dashed by the decision to bat first at Lord's, Middlesex's Ryan Higgins taking four for 30 with the ball to skittle the visitors for 103 and then scoring 115 off 124 balls as the home side posted 255 in response. Kent started the day in the box seat for the second promotion place behind champions Durham and are 77 for one replying to Gloucestershire's 229 at Canterbury.
Emilio Gay scored his fourth ton of the season for Durham as they cruised to 355 for five against a beleaguered Lancashire at Old Trafford. Worcestershire lead Derbyshire by 131 runs, Ben Allison pocketing five for 22 to raze Wayne Madsen's side for 88 in their first innings.
The champagne is on ice in Warwickshire but probably not for much longer. Fourteen wickets fell on the opening day in Edgbaston and ten of them belonged to relegation scufflers Leicestershire who won the toss in late September sunshine and decided to bat first. A couple of hours later and the Foxes were bowled out for just 125. Baby faced assassin Ethan Bamber continued his fine season with the ball, the cherubic 27 year old took 4-42 to go level with Hampshire's Kyle Abbott as the leading wicket-taker in Division one this year. It was the seventh innings in succession that the Bears have routed their opponents for under 200. They finished the day five runs ahead with six wickets in hand and have at least a few digits on the trophy.
Asa Tribe scored his second century in successive innings as Glamorgan reached 318-3 against Essex in Cardiff. The bowling point Essex picked upis likely enough to see Leicestershire relegated. An asterisk comes in the form of the appeal club Chief Executive Emma White confirmed the midlands club had lodged with the independent Cricket Discipline Panel after they were handed a 27 point deduction for a poor pitch in their match against Glamorgan in the ninth round.
Any chance of a Mexican standoff in the race for the Division One title was deescalated by Surrey racking up327-4against second placedSomerset. Dan Lawrence going to his sixth century of the campaign with a howitzer six into the stands off Jack Leach. The sun setting along with Somerset's hopes of a hoodoo breaking Championship title late in the day at Taunton.
At Trent Bridge, third placed Nottinghamshire slipped from a well-placed 172-4 to finish on 242-9 against Yorkshire and in the battle of the south coast Hampshire slipped to 55-4 in reply to Sussex's 244.
In Division Two, Northamptonshire's hopes of promotion were dashed by the decision to bat first at Lord's, Middlesex's Ryan Higgins taking 4-30 with the ball to skittle the visitors for 103 and then scoring 115 off 124 balls as the home side posted 255 in response.
Emilio Gay scored his fourth ton of the season for Durham as they cruised to 355-5 against a beleaguered Lancashire at Old Trafford. Worcestershire lead Derbyshire by 131 runs, Ben Allison pocketing 5-22 to raze Wayne Madsen's side for 88 in their first innings. Kent are 77-1 replying to Gloucestershire's 229 at Canterbury.
If the ball dominated the first half of the day - when 14 wickets fell at alarmingly regular intervals - the bat has come roaring back this afternoon, with Ben Geddes (57) and Ryan Higgins (88 not out) placing Middlesex in a seemingly unassailable position, at 217-6 leading by 114 runs with four first-innings wickets in hand.
There is no hangover from the One Day Cup celebrations when Higgins also starred with the bat. Tim Murtagh, the Middlesex bowling coach, said earlier that if there was another month of the season he would expect Middlesex to kick on again, such is the upbeat mood in the camp and their improving form. They are supremely well-placed to finish the season with a fifth County Championship victory. Another 10 overs are meant to be bowled, but the light is fading fast and the shadows are lengthening. The sun has already set on Northamptonshire's Division One hopes."
Righto, I'm going to get my head down to write up for tomorrow's paper. Do keep chatting below the line and see you back here in a little while. Keep an eye on the place for me.
Ed Barnard hasn't missed a county championship match since 2019. Proper criggit. He strides to the middle at Edgbaston after Vansh Jani plays a wild hack to Ajaz Patel and is easily caught at mid off for 22. Warwickshire 88-4 and trailing by 37.
Drama in the final over of the day at Taunton, Dan Lawrence refuses to take a single on 98 as he cuts Jack Leach to deep point... no mither... next ball he smashes his fourth six of the day off Leach over cow corner to go to his sixth century of the season!
The oracle Yas Rana informs me that Lawrence hasn't been out between 50-100 for Surrey all season. Bet he wishes that was the case for England...
Here at Edgbaston the Warwickshire pair of Sam Hain and Vansh Jani have steadied things for the champions elect after that wobbly start. The Bears trail by 39 runs as late September shadows stretch across the outfield.
"Somerset's hopes of a first County Championship are sinking with the sun into the west" laments BBC Somerset's Anthony Gibson after Dan Lawrence larrups his third six off Jack Leach. The rubber wristed former Essex man is onto 95 and Surrey are 308-4.
Wayne Madsen is still there for Derbyshire but they've lost another! Luis Reece edges behind to leave them 52-5! Brooke Guest joins his captain with a big job on.
Ben Allison is ripening with the ball for the Pears! The Worcestershire man has 3-17 in his opening spell with Derbyshire teetering at 41-4 in response to 214. Skipper Wayne Madsen is at the crease trying to steady the Derbyshire ship on 15*.
Dan Lawrence is into the 60s at Taunton, Surrey are 253-4 off 84 overs with Ben Foakes unbeaten on 33. 84 overs! They've rattled through them down there, very much not the case here at Edgbaston where we have night on 25 overs left to get through.
Asa Tribe is finishing the season strongly, his second hundred in as many innings and its been a patiently impressive one, off 206 deliveries. Glamorgan are cruising along at 257-2, captain Kiran Carlson also tonning up but is now out bowled to Matt Critchley.
Middlesex are 110 for five at tea, having previously slumped to 32 for four, and they lead by seven on a glorious afternoon at Lord's. Ben Geddes (57) and Ryan Higgins (28 not out) steadied the hosts' ship and showed solid, sensible batting is possible after Ben Sanderson of Northamptonshire had ripped through the top order. Geddes batted fluently before being bowled by Gus Miller just before tea, having added 76 for the fifth wicket alongside Higgins.
Meanwhile Sanderson, the seamer, has four for 37, including three lbws, one of which looked a touch generous by the umpire. Sanderson seems keen to make up for his bizarre earlier dismissal, when he effectively left a straight one from Higgins, Middlesex's hero in the One Day Cup final triumph last weekend. The cup winners are sure to establish a significant first-innings lead here, surely extinguishing any lingering hope of promotion for Northamptonshire."
Haseeb Hameed has been prised out at Trent Bridge, 71 off 187 balls and it took a beauty from Matthew Revis to draw him into playing outside off stump and the nick is taken by a gleeful Johnny Bairstow.
Emilio Gay notches up his fourth century of the campaign for Durham at Old Trafford, 156 balls and 14 customarily attractive boundaries. One for England's Test team next Emilio? Durham 229-2
Now then, Warwickshire have slipped to 22-2 here at Edgbaston! Mousley edges Ian Holland and its a very smart low grab by Sheridan Gumbs in the slips. Mousley stands for a good few seconds, not to challenge the catch I don't think but more in disappointment. He'd stopped play to get running repairs to his bat before the ball that had his name on it too. Maybe it was a wafty bit of edging tape that kissed the ball?
Glamorgan are going well against Essex - Tribe is ticking along on 72* and Kiran Carlson is 65*, the pair have put on a hundred runs and counting.
Elsewhere, Emilio Gay is closing in on a well made century for Durham at Old Trafford, he's into the nineties and has struck 12 fours in his 137 balls. Jinxing knife, what jinxing knife?
Here at Edgbaston, Rob Yates hacks an attempted off side drive onto his stumps to depart for a duck, Ian Holland with the early riposte for Leicestershire.
Seven wickets have fallen in the South Coast ding dong at Hove the inland Utilita Bowl - Sussex are currently 164-7 against Hampshire, Jack Carter showing some lower order resistance with 34 and counting including three 4s and two 6s.
The game is on fast forward at Lord's! Three Middlesex wickets have already fallen in response to Northants' 103. Ben Sanderson pockets both openers Robson and Fernandes lbw and he gets a third too Max Holden is back in the shed after feathering to McManus behind the sticks!
Northants are skittled out for 103, Ryan Higgins' accuracy and movement spearheading a strong Middlesex bowling performance with figures of 4-30. Danru Ferns also bowled at a lively pace for his 4-29. The 23-year-old James Sales, batting No 6, mostly struck the ball superbly for his 43 but ran out of partners - and ended up hacking the ball all around the park while refusing a single to protect the tailenders.
Darren Lehmann's side really needed to cash in on batting points to maintain any realistic hope of overhauling Kent and snatching promotion. Still, it's a lovely day for a game of cricket, and a lone fox was recently enjoying the sunshine in front of the vacant Grand Stand. The "Media soup" was taken at lunch: thankfully it is not made out of media, even at this late stage of the season."
Took a stroll around the Edgbaston outfield to see Ethan Bamber bowl Ajaz Patel through a big chop on and get a hearty round of applause as he returns to his fielding position at fine leg. Beaming smile across cherubic cheeks.
That's it now too - Josh Hull is Leicestershire's last man to fall, plinking a simple return catch to Ed Barnard - Leicestershire 125 all out in 47 overs.
That's the seventh innings in succession that the Bears have routed their opponents for under 200.
Kent fans will be licking their lips at the Northants scorecard in St John's Wood but they are in a scrap of their own to secure promotion as Gloucestershire are going well in Canterbury, Ollie Price is unbeaten on fifty and the visitors are 107-3 after being put in.
In the Div One relegation stakes it isn't going well for Leicestershire here at Edgbaston - the Foxes are currently 93-6 - but it's not all bad news for the midlanders as fellow bottom of the table stragglers Essex are being made to work by Glamorgan who are 109-1 in Cardiff with Asa Tribe unbeaten on 50.
A calamitous first half an hour after lunch for Worcestershire at New Road, they have lost four wickets in six overs to slip to 127-6 against Derbyshire.
Matthew Hoggard can sleep easy for now, Yorkshire's 17 year wait for a Champo hat-trick continues... as Cliff is denied his third in a row by Jack Haynes clipping a straight ball for four. Notts 70-3.
Adam Lyth has taken his second slip catch at Trent Bridge... and his third! Ben Martindale and Joe Clarke fall in successive balls to Ben Cliff who is now on a hat-trick...
The players reemerge at a sun strewn Edgbaston, afternoon sessions about to get underway on day one.
Guy Hornsby is at Old Trafford and sends in this heartfelt message about the state of things at Lancs:
"Afternoon from a beautifully sunny Old Trafford, James. The weather may be sublime but the outlook is anything but at Lancashire of late. After a lively start to the season, the wheels have very much come off. As much as I adore Jimmy, if your top stroke bowler is in his 40s, that's an issue. We've struggled to bowl sides out, and when we have, we can't back up up with runs.
Today is no exception, with Durham looking serene at lunch, both McKinney and Gay good for their century partnership and while Bailey was economical, and Stanley pacy, things feel like they're getting away already. The announcement of the departure of Mark Chilton felt long overdue but jettisoning David Thorley felt pretty unfair given the recent trophies for the women. You feel it's a clearing of the decks before Richard Kenyon starts his tenure, but with red ball cricket at rock bottom, who will feel the job is an attractive one? We can talk about being a big club, but the results just don't back it up. It's a massive shame, because it's a fantastic place to watch cricket. I hope things can turn around soon."
The century is batting's yardstick, from the amateur game to the very highest level. Blame it on a decimal counting system if you want. Blame your lack of one on a lifetime of dodgy dismissals, snakepit surfaces and apparently "unplayable" deliveries. Whatever. When it comes to centuries, you've either made one or you haven't.
A man who knows that all too well is Mason Crane. After more than 10 years as a professional, the Glamorgan leg-spinner has seen his batting form flourish in the past couple of years, culminating in a maiden first-class century against Surrey this summer. "It's so cool to be able to say you've got one," he says. "That extra column ... it's special. Everyone still puts plenty of weight on it."
Up the road, up a bit, a bit more right a bit, at Headingley, England have just started bowling at Sri Lanka in the second ODI. Rob Smyth and Taha Hashim are on the tools for that one. You can go and have a look, but be back for your tea - the afternoon sessions.
Luke M pops up with a lunchtime update from Lord's:
No sooner had I written that Vasconcelos was leaving the ball well, he was caught in the slips for 26 via a wild slash outside off stump: and Northants are listing badly at 80-6 at lunch. There are glimmers of hope: the 23-year-old James Sales looked in good nick in the nets at around 9.45am, and has looked good in the middle too, hitting five fours in his 27 not out. Gloucestershire are looking capable of making a game of it against Kent in Canterbury, but at this rate Darren Lehmann's side will certainly be in Division Two next season regardless. Lewis McManus was unlucky to see a leading edge fly straight back to the bowler Tom Helm, who took a sharp catch for the sixth wicket. The first session emphatically belonged to the hosts."
The players leave the field here at Edgbaston, Leicestershire battling at 78-5. You know what, it could have been worse. Time to take a tour around the grounds for the lunchtime scores.
Notts have lost their first at Trent Bridge, Ben Slater edging a rising ball from Ben Coad to Adam Lyth at slip. Notts 59-1.
At Old Trafford, Ben McKinney has gone to fifty off 74 balls for Durham but - don't tell Big Kookaburra's Gary Naylor - it's the fourth Dukes ball of the morning they have gone through in the opening twenty or so overs. That's a bad batch. Durham 112-1
"Radical thought... too much turns on the toss in late September, as scorecards today attest. At Lord's, the ball isn't hooping or seaming miles, but it's doing enough for Northants' batters to push hard at it with a "get some runs now because there's one with your name on it" attitude. What is to be done?
Well, why not play this last tranche of Championship fixtures with the much maligned old Kookaburra? That might tip the balance back towards the batting side and make 10.30am starts more even."
I take your point Gary, I do, but also if it was so cut and dried I am confused as to why some teams, including Leicestershire here at Edgbaston who are 63-5, would choose to bat first? Herein lies the wonder of cricket and the unreadable nature of pitches, balls and conditions?
I'll do a lunchtime sweep around the grounds but am currently all eyes on the action here at Edgbaston with Leicestershire 55-5, Ben Cox and Ian Holland digging in against Hannon-Dalby and Barnard. There's a sense that a wicket could fall almost every ball.
Ollie Hannon-Dalby strikes here at Edgbaston! Leicestershire are now 47-4 and in some serious trouble... make that 47-5! Sol Budinger nicks off to Ed Barnard and is snaffled by the teflon handed Rob Yates at second slip. Carnage.
No sooner had I pressed send on Luke's morning dispatch than the alert pings that Vasconcelos has nicked off to second slip to leave Northants 46-5! Gulp.
M'esteemed colleague Luke McLaughlin is at Lord's and sends this missive after the first hour of play. Northants are in big trouble already:
Sunshine has broken out at Lord's after a cloudy start, where it feels more late August than late September, and the pavilion is well populated. The climate is changing but Toby Roland-Jones remains constant, the 38-year-old dealing an early blow to Northamptonshire's promotion hopes by removing Luke Proctor lbw for 0 in the first over. Gus Miller went for 10, also lbw to Ryan Higgins, and Saif Zaib was caught at first slip off the same bowler, before Calvin Harrison slapped a Danru Ferns long-hop to cover. No 1 batter Ricardo Vasconcelos survived a confident caught-behind appeal off Higgins in the fourth over, but has looked solid for 26 not out, and has left the ball well. Not the start the visitors wanted after winning the toss and batting, though: 44-4 off 14 overs."
That man Jack Leach has got the breakthrough in Taunton. Michael Vaughan and Steve Finn have both been calling for Leach to be recalled into the Test side, definitely one to keep an eye on, particularly with the Bangladesh series early next year.
Leach snares his old England teammate Rory Burns who plays a loose sweep and gifts a top edge to Tom Abell.
I've arrived at Edgbaston to see Ethan Bamber deliver his seventh over on the spin with sun bursting through the clouds. Leicestershire need it to flatten this pitch into the roadiest road pronto... Baby faced assassin Bamber has 1-13 and Woakes 2-11. Tidy.
A ripple of applause for the introduction of Ollie Hannon-Dalby. I enjoyed his chat with Tanya ahead of this game:
His long career gives him the perspective to see how the game has been transformed, and what matters. "Cricket has changed a little bit, there are lots of offshoots, and the franchise world of course. But on a day-to-day basis, the measure of you as a cricketer is either Test cricket if you can play it, or otherwise the County Championship.
To do well in county cricket is incredibly satisfying, and being able to win the championship is a great marker in your career. It says a lot that the great Chris Woakes could have sailed off into the sunset, but he has stayed for weeks like this." By Sunday, we will know how the die fell."
Am enjoying the chat below the line, do keep the pearls coming.
This for example:
"Morning Jim, morning everyone. Oh Leicestershire, don't do that..."
and also -
"Off-topic: Mark Wood is one of only two cricketers in my short time following the sport who I've thought, "There's a cricketer I'd love to sit down and have a chat with." (Moeen Ali the other.) This is partly due to me not knowing much about most cricketers, but Mark Wood was so odd, so interesting that he broke through that barrier. Seemed like a genuinely lovely chap who kept his weird personality despite his time in the limelight. Amazing cricketer as well.
First-class and Test cricket has lost a goodun, but it's the commentary box's gain. Every radio and TV platform showing the cricket should be showering him with offers."
Toby Roland Jones has picked up an early wicket at Lord's, Procter pinned LBW...
and that is out too!
It's all go at Edgbaston, the Wizard Woakes nips one back into Rishi Patel who offers no shot and is stone dead. There are good leaves and bad leaves, son... Leics 10-2 and in the mire after choosing to bat.
Ethan Bamber bowls Sheridan Gumbs with the fourth ball of the day at Edgbaston! It's a beauty that nips in a touch and beats the outside edge of Gumbs' textbook forward defence to kiss the off bail! Bamber hares off in delight!
Good news! The weather is set fair around the country with only a small chance of rain coming in a bit later on and only in a few places. That's a very detailed forecast eh? Schafernaker is safe for now...
Warwickshire have their destiny in their own hands, 14 points will see them crowned Division One Champs. They don't even have to win outright either, a draw with six bonus points gets the job done.
Somerset are 11 points behind in second place and last year's winners Nottinghamshire 15 behind.
At t'other end of Div one it is spicy too -
Hampshire are down already, Leicestershire (who are due to appeal their 27 point pitch infraction deduction, say that ten times fast) and Essex are battling to not be the other team relegated to Div 2.
Leics have to beat Warwickshire and scoop some bonus points to realistically have any chance of dropping down and Essex need to not lose to Glammy. It's all much more complicated than that of course but you don't need me to tell you that.
Jim here, I'm stepping into Tanya's red stillettos, yes they have a prominent Dukes seam circling around the toe, for the next two days. Be gentle won't you?
I'm currently on the rattler up to Edgbaston to see if Warwickshire can get the job done against Leicestershire. A fair few folk in Somerset will be hoping the next few days take a different course.
That's just at the top of Division One. We'll have an eye on all of the action across the shires and the comments below the line will be open for your musings, frustrations and exultations.
Join us for all the end of season stories as they unfold. Play starts around the grounds at 10:30am. All aboard!
Helpfully, Tanya and Andy Bull have prepared these excellent scene setters: