Thanks for reading today's blog. Scott will be looking after the singles tomorrow and it should be an absolutely terrific occasion. The last four Solheim Cups in Europe have gone right to the wire and there looks to be every chance of something similar happening this year - if, of course, the Europeans rebound from Jennifer Kupcho's left and right hook combo.
11:10 Megan Khang v Charley Hull
11:22 Alison Lee v Esther Henseleit
11:34 Angel Yin v Linn Grant
11:46 Nelly Korda v Mimi Rhodes
11:58 Allisen Corpuz v Nanna Koerstz Madsen
12:10 Andrea Lee v Nastasia Nadaud
12:22 Yealimi Noh v Julia Lopez Ramirez
12:34 Austin Kim v Lottie Woad
12:46 Lauren Coughlin v Leona Maguire
12:58 Lindy Duncan v Maja Stark
13:10 Jennifer Kupcho v Carlota Ciganda
13:22 Rose Zhang v Celine Boutier
An intriguing observation from the US team captain Angela Stanford: the American team has never led Europe ahead of the singles prior to the Sunday singles. In being tied they have equalled the best position.
She came into this week believing that being neck and neck on Saturday night would be a great result and she has it.
Angela Stanford on her team: "I love this team, but they have not been as free this week as they were in practice. I think this finish tonight is what will free them for tomorrow."
Jennifer Kupcho speaking to the press about the experience of converting her putt on 17th and regaining her composure: "The fact that the walk from the 17th green to the 18th tee is a little long gave me the chance to calm down. I knew I needed to do that. I even more or less said to the team as they celebrated around me that I needed to bring my heart rate down."
The two captains have one hour from the end of the fourballs to come up with their singles line ups. There will be 12 of them and the whisper is that they will head off at 11. We will have confirmation with the announcement of the rosters.
The mind factor: How do the Europeans react to those devastating late upper cuts delivered by Jennifer Kupcho? And how do the Americans ride that enormous boost of adrenalin?
The singles factor: The Americans typically dominate the singles, winning 122.5 points to 97.5 through the match history.
The tie factor: the Americans will retain the Solheim Cup with a tie tomorrow.
TV showed an excellent angle on 17 which captured the response of both captains to Jennifer Kupcho's putt. The American skipper Angela Stanford was understandably pumped and raced towards her team. As she did so she passed Europe's leader Anna Nordqvist who was absolutely still except for the merest hint of a rueful Mona Lisa smile.
Carlota Ciganda up first - and it's a good putt but it settles just wide of the hole at dead pace. Europe secures a par. Two chances for America to pinch the point.
Carlota Ciganda has been very, very lucky. She's missed the heather and the sand - and found scruffy grass on an upslope.
On the other side of the fairway, Boutier has taken a drop and will be playing three into the green. With a fairway wood it's a decent strike to about 12 feet.
But what can Ciganda do? It's a blind shot, with a 5-iron, and she pulls away from it ...
Take two and it's a solid blow to a familiar spot about 30-feet short of the hole.
The heart rates on the 18th tee could probably fuel the Netherlands through the winter. Lindy Duncan finds the fairway and now Jennifer Kupcho has to restore her equilibrium - she does it by finding the short grass.
How do the punch drunk Europeans fare? Celine Boutier is up first and pulls a 3-wood into the ditch, looking bereft after doing so. Carlota Ciganda has a huge weight on her shoulders and cannot carry it. She flails her ball wide right towards heather and sand.
Replays of Jennifer Kupcho's celebrations are rather wonderful. There was exhiliration but there was a also a touch of not knowing what to do which always raises a celebration up a notch or two.
We've had two excellent days of action but that was the big moment these occasions need. Utterly bonkers. A long, loooping putt that went uphill, downhill, left-to-right, right-to-left and, crucually, in the hole.
To the approach shots at 17. Kupcho found only the fluffiest of heather but got a flier and her ball scuttled through the green. Boutier pounced by knocking her approach to ten feet and Ciganda did the same. Big pressure on Duncan who will feel she needs to find birdie just to take the match down 18.
She can only land it 20 feet past the pin where it stops but does not close on the hole. The good news is that she'll get to go first and possibly reverse the anxiety on to the Europeans, but it's a big ask.
The 17th tee. Lindy Duncan is up first and finds the short grass. Jennifer Kupcho does not join her, squeezing her ball into the heather on the right. No mistake from Celine Boutier who threads the ball down the middle and Carlota Ciganda flirts with the heather before trickling into safety in the fringe.
Europe remain 1UP. Stay that way and they will lead by two overnight. But the Americans are sniffing the chance to close the gap.
The focus of attention moves to the 16th green and a match that has become a little bit messy (in fact, the last hour has felt that way after a lot of fine golf before then). After both Europeans found water on 15, Jennifer Kupcho has done so on this par-five. Her partner Lindy Duncan has a 60 foot eagle putt and she plays it magnificently to the hole's edge. Birdie for America.
But can Carlota Ciganda pinch it with an eagle of her own? No and she doesn't leave it near the hole either. She has three feet to retain a 1UP lead going up 17. Big moment. She makes it. Just.
Can Yealimi Noh polish off her match in style? She's been the elite performer this afternoon and finds the heart of the 18th green, just inside Lottie Woad who will give her the line from around 25 feet. Charley Hull, after a drop, bunts her ball to 10 feet. Andrea Lee could only hack out of the fairway bunker. The Americans, remember, only need to half the final hole to win the match.
At 18 Lottie Woad finds the fairway, but Charley Hull (for a second day running) finds the creeks down the left. Yealimi Noh joins Woad in the fairway and Andrea Lee finds a fairway bunker. The English duo need to win the hole to grab a half. We're set for a nervy finale in this contest.
After splashing two balls in the water at 15 Carlota Ciganda and Celine Boutier cannot save the situation and make a sad journey to the 16th tee. They are now just 1UP with three to play.
Euro disaster at 15. Celine Boutier finds water from the tee at the par-three and Carlota Ciganda follows her in. They are 2UP with four to play but surely about to go 1UP with three to play.
Charley Hull is centimetres from slam dunking her approach to 17. It kicks on to about 15 feet and Lottie Woad is in similar range. They have a chance to win the hole because Andrea Lee has missed the green and Yealimi Noh found trouble from the tee ... but she stubs her ball from heather to the fringe. The two Brits will needs to hole one of the putts at the very least.
VAMOS! Carlota Ciganda has had a sensational afternoon and another birdie putt drops at 14, this one from 12 feet to send her and Celine Boutier 2UP with four to play. She drops her putter and raises her arms to the galleries. Among those cheering is her English husband Jamie, hugging another member of the European back room team.
Nastasia Nadaud knocked her tee shot at the par-three 15th to eight feet and drains the birdie putt to extend the third match into the final three holes. She and Leona Maguire are now 3DOWN, but have a little momentum to play with. It's an odd business but, sometimes in a Solheim Cup, when a big lead starts to fritter away the chasers begin to look far more confident than the pair leading.
At 16 the American duo of Yealimi Noh and Andrea Lee have made solid birdies. Lottie Woad almost did by finding water and then clattering the flag stick (after a drop) with her fourth. But Charley Hull has 25 feet for a winning eagle. Can she find the cup? Oh no! It dies across the front of the hole.
Noh and Lee remain 2UP with only 17 and 18 to play.
How good were Linn Grant and Maja Stark? They have just ended two significant streaks. Megan Khang had won six matches in a row - and the all-time winning streak record is seven. Khang had also won or tied nine matches in a row. The all-time unbeaten streak record is ten. And Lauren Coughlin had won or tied each of her seven career matches, the second-longest unbeaten streak to start a Cup career. They were no match for the Swedes.
"Oh man, it's so nice to know that Linn's not freaking out and she knows I'm not freaking out. We don't have to baby each other," says Maja Stark of her 3-0-0 partnership with Linn Grant this week.
BOOM! Maja Stark has been superb this afternoon (she's been excellent all week but especially good this afternoon). She drains a 15 foot birdie putt at 17 to confirm the third triumph of the week.
Maja Stark and Linn Grant beat Lauren Coughlin and Megan Khang 2&1.
Woad/Hull v Noh/An. Lee 2UP (15)
Nadaud/Maguire v Zhang/Kim 4UP (13)
1UP Ciganda/Boutier v Kupcho/Duncan (13)
Lottie Woad converts her birdie chance at 15 to keep on the heels of the Americans Yealimi Noh and Andrea Lee. The latter remain 2UP and there are only three holes to play, but Woad has hung tough there.
She and Hull continue to be something of an enigma. There's no evident rapport but surely they must have something that the skipper believes in as they seek a first win in their fourth game.
The Americans are looking in good shape right now - and Yealimi Noh has just knocked her tee shot at the par-three 15th to eight feet. Lottie Woad and Charley Hull are also close, however. The second match is not a given yet.
1UP Stark/Grant v Khang/Coughlin (16)
Woad/Hull v Noh/An. Lee 2UP (14)
Nadaud/Maguire v Zhang/Kim 4UP (12)
Ciganda/Boutier A/S Kupcho/Duncan (12)
To the 16th green. Megan Khang's eagle putt doesn't drop, stays close-ish and isn't given. Linn Grant putts from off the back of the putting surface and pulls up eight feet short.
This has turning point written all over it.
What can Lauren Coughlin do? She putts through the fringe to the hole side. Birdie assured, but can Grant equal it and maintain the Swedish duo's 2UP lead? No! Squeaky bum time up 17 and 18 now.
Back at 12 Lindy Duncan wins her first hole of the day to draw her and Jennifer Kupcho level with Carlota Ciganda and Celine Boutier in the bottom match.
Yealimi Noh, the best player on show this afternoon, knocks her approach at 13 to 12 feet. She ticked nine birdies in 13 holes earlier in the round. Not one golfer has achieved that on the LPGA this season. That's how hot her golf has been today.
The par-five 16th was highlighted as a key hole this week. It's a par-five with water in front of the green. Maja Stark has just avoided heather with her drive and has a risky thrash with her second. It finds that water.
Now Megan Khang. Her blow just about finds the putting surface and gives her playing partner, Lauren Coughlin, freedom. She makes the most of it by taking aim at the flag and leaing herself about 20-feet for eagle. What can Linn Grant respond with? She goes through the green. Not bad, but the Americans, 2DOWN, have a chance of extending the match.
Andrea Lee has joined Yealimi Noh at the party. Her 15 foot birdie at 13 takes the US pair 2UP on Lottie Woad and Charley Hull. It's only the third counting score made by Lee today and the first that has won a hole.
Maja Stark has drained another sensational shot. "Awesome," cries team mate Julia Lopez Ramirez as the Swede's rollercoaster putt at 15 drops. Lauren Coughlin matches her birdie from four feet. The match is hurrying to a conclusion.
2UP Stark/Grant v Khang/Coughlin (15)
Woad/Hull v Noh/An. Lee 1UP (12)
Nadaud/Maguire v Zhang/Kim 3UP (11)
1UP Ciganda/Boutier v Kupcho/Duncan (11)
Linn Grant loves a home Solheim Cup. She went 3-2-0 on debut in Spain, 0-4-0 in Virginia in 2024, and now she's firing again. 2-0-0 until lunchtime, 2UP in the top match and she's played a great shot into the par-three 15th. Huge smile on her face and entirely justified in a noisy corner of the course.
The party feel here in Den Bosch is appropriate. The city has a famous annual carnival which transforms it into a village called Oeteldonk. Yes, for one week it has a completely different name.
The carnival history stretches back to the Middle Ages. The Solheim Cup is a little younger - it was first held in 1990.
Can Lottie Woad add to the vibe? She has a birdie putt at 12 to pull level with Yealimi Noh and Andrea Lee ... but it hits the hole and spins out. Carnival cancelled. Only briefly. Celine Boutier chips in for birdie at 10. It's giddy stuff.
There is a lot of noise on the course currently. And Morgan Pressel notes that the holes are very tight at this point on the back nine. I was out there earlier and it's true. There are vantage points that allow you to watch two holes at once. The fans are thriving on it.
Rose Zhang slams a 10 foot birdie putt at 11 into the hole. She's now 3UP with Auston Kim on Europe's Irish-French combo of Leona Maguire and Nastasia Nadaud.
An eagle-3 for Rose Zhang allows her and Auston Kim to edge 2UP on Leona Maguire and Nastasia Nadaud. Zhang has struggled a little this week, perhaps being a little careful having come into the week with injury concerns.
The other injury concern of the week was Angel Yin who has played just once and is currently on the range trying to find something for the singles.
Maja Stark makes birdie at 13, the third in a row for the Swedes. Big roars. And plenty, too, when the Americans cannot match it. She and Linn Grant now lead 2UP in the top match.