Arsenal
Bringing in Christos Tzolis, Bruno Guimarães and Ezri Konsa was a strong start to the window but could Arsenal's failure to sign a marquee attacker cost them in the long run? They began targeting Morgan Rogers before pivoting to Vinícius Júnior when the England forward went to Chelsea, only to end up disappointed when Vinícius signed a new deal with Real Madrid. Julián Alvarez made clear he had no intention of joining from Atlético Madrid in the final days of the window and Arsenal kept their powder dry despite sanctioning the exits of Gabriel Jesus to Barcelona and Ethan Nwaneri to Borussia Dortmund. Should Gabriel Martinelli complete his move to Al-Hilal as expected in the coming days - the Saudi Pro League window remains open - a few injuries could leave Arteta short. Ed Aarons
Key ins: Bruno Guimarães (Newcastle, £75m), Ezri Konsa (Aston Villa, £51m), Piero Hincapié (Bayer Leverkusen, £45m), Christos Tzolis (Club Brugge, £34m)
Key outs: Leandro Trossard (Besiktas, £15.3m), Jakub Kiwior (Porto, £14.5m), Gabriel Jesus (Barcelona, £8.6m), Fábio Vieira (Hamburg, £7.7m), Christian Nørgaard (Everton, £7m), Ethan Nwaneri (Borussia Dortmund, loan)
Aston Villa
It is all change at Villa and, although a little trepidation is inevitable, a refresh was probably overdue. At the same time, Unai Emery did not want to lose so many key players and Villa's manager has made clear there is no such thing as a transition season in his eyes. Villa have generated about £300m from the sales of nine players and brought in 10 at a cost of about £250m. Villa have lowered their wage bill and changed the profile of their squad. Zion Suzuki, Ibrahim Mbaye and Johan Manzambi, names on the lips of Villa's rivals, are particularly exciting signings. Last summer there was concern Villa had gone stale and 12 months ago they ended up fretting on deadline day - Harvey Elliott and Jadon Sancho joined on loan - but there was no such chaos this time. Ben Fisher
Key ins: Johan Manzambi (Freiburg, £51m), Nicolas Jackson (Chelsea, £47.5m), Ibrahim Mbaye (PSG, £47m), João Gomes (Wolves, £34m), Zion Suzuki (Parma, £30m), Taylor Harwood-Bellis (Southampton, £25m), Matteo Ruggeri (Atlético Madrid, £21.4m), Leon Goretzka (Bayern Munich, free), Aaron Wan-Bissaka (West Ham, loan), Alejandro Garnacho (Chelsea, loan)
Key outs: Morgan Rogers (Chelsea, £117m), Ollie Watkins (Al-Hilal, £51m), Ezri Konsa (Arsenal, £51m), Youri Tielemans (Manchester United, £35m), Donyell Malen (Roma, £21.6m), Lewis Dobbin (Southampton, £9m), Lucas Digne (PSG, £8.5m), Emiliano Martínez (Chelsea, £7.5m), Evann Guessand (Crystal Palace, loan)
Bournemouth
Perhaps Bournemouth's best business was keeping hold of their coveted key players, chiefly Eli Junior Kroupi, Rayan, Alex Scott and Tyler Adams. Bournemouth rejected bids from Chelsea for Scott and stayed true to their plan of resisting offers to give Marco Rose the best chance of succeeding, with the club attempting to juggle European competition and the league for the first time. The arrival of the Portugal centre-back António Silva, 22, from Benfica looks a typically smart replacement for Marcos Senesi, 29. Kroupi's freak foot injury, which will probably keep him out until November, may have proved a blessing in disguise in terms of retaining the 20-year-old. BF
Key ins: António Silva (Benfica, £21.4m), Álvaro Rodríguez (Elche, £21.3m), Juanlu Sánchez (Sevilla, £11.1m), Michele Di Gregorio (Juventus, loan)
Key outs: Luis Sinisterra (Cruzeiro, £5.2m), Enes Unal (Getafe, free), Álex Jiménez (Fiorentina, loan), Marcos Senesi (Tottenham, free)
Brentford
Avoiding a repeat of last year's upheaval was a major boost. Keith Andrews held on to his best players and made smart additions to a solid squad. Mamadou Sangaré has added quality in midfield since joining from Lens and looks the bargain of the summer. Callum Wilson has brought experience up front after signing on a free and Jaidon Anthony provides cover on the flanks after his £15m move from Burnley. El Hadji-Malick Diouf, signed from West Ham, offers potential at left-back. Jacob Steinberg
Key ins: Mamadou Sangaré (Lens, £39m), El Hadji Malick Diouf (West Ham, £35m), Jaidon Anthony (Burnley, £15m), Jannik Schuster (Red Bull Salzburg, £14m), Callum Wilson (West Ham, free)
Key outs: Ethan Pinnock (Coventry, £6m), Jordan Henderson (Chelsea, free)
Brighton
Deadline day deals to bring in the exciting Nigeria forward Femi Azeez from Millwall and the Spanish midfielder Chema Andrés from Stuttgart made it 12 signings in another summer of transition, Azeez's arrival being announced almost 12 hours after the window shut. The departures of Jan Paul van Hecke, Carlos Baleba and Carl Rushworth brought in more than £140m as the Brighton model continues to deliver big profits, although losing last season's top scorer, Danny Welbeck, to Chelsea for a mere £5m may be the biggest loss if the new striker Promise David cannot bring the goals. EA
Key ins: Luka Vuskovic (Tottenham, £46m), Zadok Yohanna (AIK, £21.5m), Chema Andrés (Stuttgart, £18.9m), Pascal Struijk (Leeds, £18m), Femi Azeez (Millwall, £15m), Jaouen Hadjam (Young Boys, £11.1m), Costinha (Olympiakos, £11m), Michael Svoboda (Venezia, £4.3m), Promise David (Union St-Gilloise, loan)
Key outs: Carlos Baleba (Manchester United, £70m), Jan Paul van Hecke (Tottenham, £52m), Carl Rushworth (Coventry, £22.5m), Diego Coppola (Paris FC, £15.3m), Danny Welbeck (Chelsea, £5m), Joël Veltman (West Ham, free), James Milner (retired), Solly March (released)
Chelsea
Xabi Alonso's appointment as manager was the biggest signing of the summer. Chelsea have been sensible since turning to the Spaniard. Morgan Rogers has started well after joining for £117m. Maxence Lacroix adds power in defence, Marco Palestra versatility on the flanks. Danny Welbeck and Jordan Henderson can raise standards in the dressing room. But there was the usual revolving door. Money was made on a host of outgoings. Marc Cucurella, one of the world's best left-backs and sold to Real Madrid, looks a bigger loss than Enzo Fernández. However a worry is that Chelsea did not replace Fernández after selling him to Manchester City for £125m, their late £47m move for Monaco's Lamine Camara collapsing at the last. JS
Key ins: Morgan Rogers (Aston Villa, £117m), Maxence Lacroix (Crystal Palace, £52m), Marco Palestra (Atalanta, £47m), Geovany Quenda (Sporting, £40m), Valentín Barco (Strasbourg, £34m), Emmanuel Emegha (Strasbourg, £21.6m), Pep Chavarría (Rayo Vallecano, £16.3m), Emiliano Martínez (Aston Villa, £7.5m), Danny Welbeck (Brighton, £5m), Jordan Henderson (Brentford, free)
Key outs: Enzo Fernández (Manchester City, £125m), Marc Cucurella (Real Madrid, £52m), Andrey Santos (Manchester United, £50m), Nicolas Jackson (Aston Villa, £47.5m), Liam Delap (Nottingham Forest, £45m), Trevoh Chalobah (Como 1907, £25.7m), Tyrique George (Everton, £18m), Marc Guiu (RB Leipzig, £14.5m), Tosin Adarabioyo (Tottenham, £7m), Axel Disasi (Crystal Palace, loan), Alejandro Garnacho (Aston Villa, loan), Benoît Badiashile (Napoli, loan), Robert Sánchez (Como, loan), Mykhailo Mudryk (Tottenham, loan)
Coventry
It remains to be seen whether Coventry have struck the right balance in the market. Frank Lampard wanted to maintain momentum but add power and physicality. Coventry also sought to address their lack of Premier League experience with Taiwo Awoniyi and Ethan Pinnock. Coventry were the highest scorers in English football's top four tiers last season but the step up means the pressure is on Awoniyi, never prolific for Nottingham Forest, Sidiki Cherif, a promising 19-year-old, and Ellis Simms to deliver before Haji Wright returns from injury. Stephen Mfuni, a teenage loanee from Manchester City and their 11th and final summer signing, increases their left-back options. BF
Key ins: Caleb Yirenkyi (Nordsjælland, £23m), Carl Rushworth (Brighton, £22.5m), Sidiki Cherif (Fenerbahce, £20.5m), Loum Tchaouna (Burnley, £20m), Aurèle Amenda (Eintracht Frankfurt, £15.4m), Taiwo Awoniyi (Nottingham Forest, £9m), Ethan Pinnock (Brentford, £6m), Gustavo Hamer (Sheffield United, £6m), Stephen Mfuni (Manchester City, loan), Frank Onyeka (Brentford, undisclosed), Dan Bentley (Wolves, undisclosed)
Key outs: None
Crystal Palace
The lost tug of war with Sunderland over Malick Fofana summed up another chaotic deadline day for Palace, who were still scrambling for signings in the final minutes and confirmed the arrivals of Ben Chilwell, Quinten Timber and Darío Osorio after the window shut. The new manager, Pierre Sage, will at least be pleased to have secured more defensive reinforcements after losing Maxence Lacroix to Chelsea, with the loanees Honest Ahanor and Axel Disasi adding much-needed depth. Palace also kept hold of Ismaïla Sarr - presuming he doesn't join a club in Saudi Arabia before the Sunday deadline there - after rejecting an approach from Liverpool for the Senegal forward. EA
Key ins: Anan Khalaili (Union St-Gilloise, £21m), Quinten Timber (Marseille, £15m), Zavier Gozo (Real Salt Lake, £11m), Axel Disasi (Chelsea, loan), Evann Guessand (Aston Villa, loan), Honest Ahanor (Atalanta, loan), Darío Osorio (Midtjylland, loan), Dwight McNeil (Everton, swap), Takehiro Tomiyasu (Ajax, free), Óscar Mingueza (Celta Vigo, free), Ben Chilwell (Strasbourg, undisclosed fee)
Key outs: Maxence Lacroix (Chelsea, £52m), Daniel Muñoz (Nottingham Forest, £22m), Brennan Johnson (Everton, swap), Borna Sosa (Cologne, loan)
Everton
It was a window that revealed the extent of The Friedkin Group's ambitions, the strength of the club's finances after the move to a new stadium, the state of the relationship between the manager and chief executive and the expertise of the senior leadership team; and none of it was positive. The owners deserve some credit for listening to fans and halting the self-defeating sale of Harrison Armstrong to Nottingham Forest but otherwise it was a modest window that descended into a shambles. The club's best player was sold for a below-market fee, a move for Folarin Balogun collapsed and although the equally desperate search for a right-back ended with Ainsley Maitland-Niles signing, David Moyes was left with one striker and a smaller squad than he started the day with, despite repeatedly urging his employers to strengthen. AH
Key ins: Tyrique George (Chelsea, £18m), Merlin Röhl (Freiburg, £17.3m), Hayden Hackney (Middlesbrough, £16.5m), Christian Nørgaard (Arsenal, £7m), Ainsley Maitland-Niles (Lyon, £4.3m), Brennan Johnson (Crystal Palace, swap), Jack Grealish (Manchester City, loan)
Key outs: Iliman Ndiaye (Manchester City, £60m), Beto (Fiorentina, £15.4m), Tim Iroegbunam (Hull, £13m), Dwight McNeil (Crystal Palace, swap), Idrissa Gueye (Al-Diriyah, free), Nathan Patterson (Torino, free), Séamus Coleman (released)
Fulham
It was a summer of change at Craven Cottage. Marco Silva departed after five successful years in charge and was replaced by the inexperienced Álvaro Arbeloa, who has focused on adding youth. Gonzalo García, César Palacios and Manuel Ángel followed Arbeloa from Real Madrid and Shea Charles is an exciting signing from Southampton. Some stalwarts have left. Raúl Jiménez joined Wolves and Harry Wilson went to Leeds. Fulham looked to strengthen. They secured the midfielder Hugo Larsson and centre-back David Affengruber on deadline day but missed out on another target, the right-back Andrei Ratiu. JS
Key ins: Gonzalo García (Real Madrid, £34.3m), Shea Charles (Southampton, £30m), David Affengruber (Elche, £10.3m), César Palacios (Real Madrid, £8.6m), Jonah Kusi-Asare (Bayern Munich, £5.2m), Manuel Ángel (Real Madrid, £3.4m), Hugo Larsson (Eintracht Frankfurt, loan)
Key outs: Sasa Lukic (Ipswich, £9m), Issa Diop (Ipswich, £8.5m), Harry Wilson (Leeds, free), Raúl Jiménez (Wolves, free)
Hull
"Think of us like a volcano," said Hull's owner, Acun Ilicali, in early July. "It's boiling right now and it's going to erupt." Two months on the Ilicali has presided over 18 signings, investing more than £150m and his manager, Sergej Jakirovic, has choreographed two Premier League wins. The horizon looks infinitely brighter than in June, when the playoff winners sold two players for a combined £8.5m to avoid breaching English Football League spending rules and a near-certain six-point deduction. Hull, remember, spent last season under a two-window EFL transfer embargo. They have compensated for that this summer and, although time will tell whether all those new faces are compatible, reasons for optimism remain real. Not least because last season's cult hero loanee forward Joe Gelhardt has signed permanently from Leeds. Louise Taylor
Key ins: Nobel Mendy (Rayo Vallecano, £20m), Konstantinos Tzolakis (Olympiakos, £20m), Lucas Herrington (Colorado Rapids, £17.1m), Ilyas Ansah (Union Berlin, £14.5m), Mohamed-Ali Cho (Nice, £13m), Brooke Norton-Cuffy (Genoa, £12m), Jens Hjerto-Dahl (Tromsø, £10m), Tim Iroegbunam (Everton, £13m), Christos Mouzakitis (Olympiakos, £12.9m), Sorba Thomas (Stoke, £7.5m), Joe Gelhardt (Leeds, £6.5m), Jack Butland (Rangers, £3.5m), Lucas Gourna-Douath (Red Bull Salzburg, £3.4m), Elliot Stroud (Mjällby, £3m), Robinio Vaz (Roma, loan), Hidemasa Morita (Sporting, free), Matt Targett (Newcastle, free), Óscar Zambrano (Maribor, undisclosed fee)
Key outs: Ivor Pandur (Rangers, £6m), Cody Drameh (Genoa, £3.9m), Abu Kamara (Portsmouth, £2.5m), Kyle Joseph (Middlesbrough, undisclosed fee)
Ipswich
The late addition of Burnley's striker Zian Flemming brought Ipswich's summer spend close to £200m. That appears to be the cost of giving yourselves a genuine shot at survival. Arrivals such as Exequiel Palacios and Julio Enciso should have no business in the lower reaches, and the former Fulham pair Sasa Lukic and Issa Diop add crucial experience. Gary O'Neil can call upon enviable depth in midfield and speed on the flanks, where Abdul Fatawu and Daizen Maeda look sharp. But time will tell whether Ipswich strengthened their defence sufficiently for regular tests of the kind they failed at Old Trafford on Sunday. Nick Ames
Key ins: Julio Enciso (Strasbourg, £26m), Emersonn (Toulouse, £24m), Exequiel Palacios (Bayer Leverkusen, £23.5m), Zian Flemming (Burnley, £20m), Abdul Fatawu (Leicester, £20m), Abdoul Ouattara (Strasbourg, £17m), Florentino Luís (Burnley, £16m), Daizen Maeda (Celtic, £10m), Sasa Lukic (Fulham, £9m), Kjell Scherpen (Union St-Gilloise, £8.6m), Issa Diop (Fulham, £8.5m), Chuba Akpom (Ajax, £7m), Kayne van Oevelen (Volendam, £3.4m), Cédric Kipré (Reims, £1.7m)
Key outs: George Hirst (Stoke, £6m), Arijanet Muric (Sassuolo, £6m), Harry Clarke (Preston, £3.5m)
Leeds
In an ideal world Daniel Farke might have wished for one more high-calibre attacking recruit but that should not detract from a very decent window, featuring seven extremely sensible signings. The importance of the acquisition of the England goalkeeper James Trafford from Manchester City should not be underestimated. Trafford will almost certainly provide Leeds with a few more extra points - not to mention enhance their play courtesy of his stellar footwork. Just in front of him Tarik Muharemovic looks an outstanding defensive buy. Harry Wilson raises creativity levels and the attacking tone. LT
Key ins: James Trafford (Manchester City, £40.5m), Tarik Muharemovic (Sassuolo, £34.1m), Nico Elvedi (Borussia Mönchengladbach, £6.8m), Michael Zetterer (Eintracht Frankfurt, £4.3m), Jean-Mattéo Bahoya (Eintracht Frankfurt, loan), Melvin Bard (Nice, loan), Harry Wilson (Fulham, free)
Key outs: Pascal Struijk (Brighton, £18m), Joe Gelhardt (Hull, £6.5m), Lucas Perri (Torino, loan), Sebastiaan Bornauw (Hamburg, loan), Joël Piroe (West Ham, loan), Illan Meslier (Arsenal, free)
Liverpool
The final window of Richard Hughes's spell as sporting director raised more questions over Liverpool's direction under Fenway Sports Group, owners soon to be enriched by a £2bn investment from 1892 Holdings. The shift towards paying big money for big names continued with Bradley Barcola's arrival from Paris Saint-Germain while Jérémy Jacquet and Victor Muñoz followed the older policy of developing young potential. Yet weaknesses remain at right back, defensive midfield and on the right wing, where Mohamed Salah's exit was foreseen from December. Squad depth is lacking and a lot rests on the return to full fitness of Hugo Ekitiké, Conor Bradley and Giovanni Leoni. AH
Key ins: Bradley Barcola (PSG, £123m), Jérémy Jacquet (Rennes, £55m), Víctor Muñoz (Osasuna, £34.5m), Ronald Araújo (Barcelona, loan)
Key outs: Curtis Jones (Inter, £25.7m), Harvey Elliott (Valencia, loan), Mohamed Salah (Trabzonspor, free), Ibrahima Konaté (Real Madrid, free), Andy Robertson (Tottenham, free)
Manchester City
With Enzo Fernández's deadline day signing for a British record-equalling £125m, Enzo Maresca can have zero complaints about a first window as Manchester City's head coach. The No 8 follows two No 6s, in Elliot Anderson (£116m) and Ayyoub Bouaddi (£85m), and the wide players Allan Elias (£34m) and Iliman Ndiaye (£60m plus £5m) as major signings, the total spend on incomings about £457.5m. Factor in how City have generated about £281.8m in outgoings for a net spend of £175.7m, the divisions third-biggest of the window, and this sizable investment has to work - particularly the acquisition of Fernández. Jamie Jackson
Key ins: Enzo Fernández (Chelsea, £125m), Elliot Anderson (Nottingham Forest, £116m), Ayyoub Bouaddi (Lille, £85.7m), Iliman Ndiaye (Everton, £60m), Allan (Palmeiras, £32m), Mathys Detourbet (Troyes, £21.6m), Gerónimo Rulli (Marseille, £1.7m)
Key outs: Sávio (Tottenham, £75m), Nico González (Newcastle, £52m), Tijjani Reijnders (Al-Qadsiah, £52m), Rodri (Barcelona, £51.3m), James Trafford (Leeds, £40.5m), Nathan Aké (Fenerbahce, £7m) Omar Marmoush (Tottenham, loan), Jack Grealish (Everton, loan), John Stones (Inter, free). Bernardo Silva (Real Madrid, free)
Manchester United
This was the window of the midfielder for Manchester United, with three recruited: Youri Tielemans (a No 8), Andrey Santos and Carlos Baleba (No 6s). Yet missing was a left-back despite the targeting of Lewis Hall, and others, plus reinforcements for the rest of a creaking rearguard. The reason? A lack of money or, maybe, a reluctance to spend unless the finance was generated by transfers. Manuel Ugarte's long-term injury (preventing his sale) and Joshua Zirkzee's reluctance to move were factors. Will the specialist Luke Shaw, plus the stand-in options of Parick Dorgu (a wing-back/left forward), Diogo Dalot and Noussair Mazraoui (right-backs), Lizandro Martínez (centre-back) and Baleba prove adequate? JJ
Key ins: Carlos Baleba (Brighton, £70m), Andrey Santos (Chelsea, £50m), Youri Tielemans (Aston Villa, £35m)
Key outs: Rasmus Højlund (Napoli, £43.2m), Casemiro (Inter Miami, free)
Newcastle
Newcastle describe their transfer window as "transformative" and, with reinvention the name of the game on Tyneside, it is easy to see why. After selling Anthony Gordon, Sandro Tonali and Bruno Guimarães for a grand total not too far off £250m, they have signed eight - mainly young - players. Along the way the spine of a team now managed by Matthias Jaissle rather than Eddie Howe has been renewed and new cult heroes including the former Benfica right-back Amar Dedic and the former Manchester City midfielder Nico González are emerging. The deadline day arrival of the exciting 21-year-old Belgium forward Matias Fernandez-Pardo from Lille is regarded as quite a coup. Have Newcastle choreographed a triumph from a window that, at one point, looked potentially disastrous? LT
Key ins: Nico González (Manchester City, £52m), Matias Fernandez-Pardo (Lille, £51m), Bazoumana Touré (Hoffenheim, £43m), Aladji Bamba (Monaco, £30m), Amar Dedic (Benfica, £29.5m), Lukas Hornicek (Braga, £25.7m), Ewen Jaouen (Reims, £21.6m), Sean Steur (Ajax, £20m)
Key outs: Sandro Tonali (Tottenham, £92.5m), Bruno Guimarães (Arsenal, £75m), Anthony Gordon (Barcelona, £69.3m), Nick Woltemade (Juventus, loan), Kieran Trippier (Wolves, free)
Nottingham Forest
Receiving £116m for Elliot Anderson was proof that among the chaos in recent years, Forest have carried out some smart recruitment. After appointing Oliver Glasner, the club worked to provide for his needs, splashing out on Ousmane Diomande, while Xaver Schalger was a sensible acquisition for free, as was Daniel Muñoz at £22m. A No 9 was the priority and it required a club record £45m to acquire the long-term target Liam Delap, who fits the bill perfectly. Whether not sourcing a direct replacement for Anderson will hurt them remains to be seen but at least they did not panic, making it a measured window where they were able to trim the squad. Will Unwin
Key ins: Liam Delap (Chelsea, £45m), Ousmane Diomande (Sporting, £34.2m), Daniel Muñoz (Crystal Palace, £22m), Steven Benda (Fulham, free), Xaver Schlager (RB Leipzig, free)
Key outs: Elliot Anderson (Manchester City, £116m), Taiwo Awoniyi (Coventry City, £9m), Omari Hutchinson (Milan, loan), Stefan Ortega (Olympiakos, free), Jota Silva (Olympiakos, loan), Morato (West Ham, loan)
Sunderland
After last summer's 14 new faces this had been a bit of a conservative, almost slightly underwhelming, window. Or at least it was until Crystal Palace tried to hijack Sunderland's agreement to sign the Lyon winger Malick Fofana and the two Premier League clubs engaged in an astonishing deadline day tug of war involving private jets from both sitting on the tarmac at Lyon airport and Fofana undergoing a medical in France unsure as to his destination until finally choosing Wearside. Arguably Sunderland's biggest achievement was keeping last season's star players. If persuading Granit Xhaka to stay rather than defect to Chelsea was vital, Régis Le Bris will be similarly delighted to have retained widely admired individuals of the calibre of Enzo Le Fée, Robin Roefs and Noah Sadiki. LT
Key ins: Malick Fofana (Lyon, £31m), Dayann Méthalie (Toulouse, £24m), Kevin Danso (Tottenham, loan), Thomas Meunier (Lille, free)
Key outs: Eliezer Mayenda (Rennes, £17.1m)
Tottenham
A comprehensive reboot, from back to front, featuring a club record outlay for a window and one of the most lavish by any club ever. In the first summer window since the departure of the longstanding chair Daniel Levy, the hierarchy have backed Roberto De Zerbi in an attempt to put the trauma of last season behind them. All the new signings have Premier League experience and - apart from Mateus Fernandes and Sávio - are aged 25 or over. In other words, they ought to be ready to hit the ground running. The opening two matches did not go to plan. It will get better. Won't it? David Hytner
Key ins: Sandro Tonali (Newcastle, £92.5m), Mateus Fernandes (West Ham, £85m), Sávio (Manchester City, £75m), Jan Paul van Hecke (Brighton, £52m), Tosin Adarabioyo (Chelsea, £7m), Omar Marmoush (Manchester City, loan), Martin Dubravka (Burnley, loan), Mykhailo Mudryk (Chelsea, loan), Marcos Senesi (Bournemouth, free), Andy Robertson (Liverpool, free)
Key outs: Luka Vuskovic (Brighton, £46m), Cristian Romero (Atlético Madrid, £34.1m), Djed Spence (Inter, £25.6m), Radu Dragusin (Fiorentina, loan), Guglielmo Vicario (Juventus, loan), Pape Matar Sarr (Juventus, loan), Kevin Danso (Sunderland, loan)