Rodri could face an extended period of time out with a back injury, which may require surgery.
The 30-year-old Manchester City midfielder returned to his finest form at the World Cup following two injury-plagued seasons. Having captained Spain to Sunday's 1-0 final win over Argentina in New Jersey, Rodri was awarded the Golden Ball as the tournament's best player. Yet he may now require an operation on a back issue that is set to rule him out for the start of the season.
It would be the latest setback following two injury-hit seasons which began with the rupturing of his anterior cruciate ligament in the 2-2 draw with Arsenal at the Etihad Stadium in September 2024. It ruled him out for most of the rest of that campaign before he was injured again at the Club World Cup last July. Hamstring and groin injuries followed last season, meaning Rodri started only 17 Premier League matches.
The back problem comes with the Spaniard's future at City uncertain, his contract expiring next June. While he has a desire to play in his home country again at some point and is thought to favour a transfer to Real Madrid, they are yet to make a concrete move to sign him. Enzo Maresca, City's new manager, hopes to keep him.
After the World Cup victory, Rodri spoke of his difficulties with injury. "For me, it's been a very tough time," he said. "I just want the new generations to see my example as an opportunity. When you go down, you can rise again. This is my philosophy for my entire life. Of course, sometimes things go well, things go wrong, but always the positiveness."
Meanwhile, Leeds are in advanced discussions to sign James Trafford for a fee in the region of £50m. The 23-year-old goalkeeper rejoined City from Burnley last summer in a £27m deal believing he would be the first choice only to see that position taken by Gianluigi Donnarumma following the Italian's arrival from Paris Saint-Germain.
Trafford started City's Carabao Cup final victory over Arsenal in March FA Cup final victory over Chelsea in May.