Katie Taylor signed off her storied career in style by outclassing Flora Pili on points as an 80,000 crowd at Croke Park celebrated her fairytale farewell.
With the gaze of Ireland upon her, the country's great became a three-time undisputed world champion by overwhelming the previously unbeaten Frenchwoman 100-90, 100-90, 98-91 on the scorecards.
Taylor dominated through her hand speed and movement and never looked in danger as she added the vacant WBC title to her WBO, WBA and IBF belts to begin the party at GAA headquarters.
As the final seconds before retirement approached, the Olympic gold medallist ended the 10th round by trading with Pili against the ropes knowing victory was assured.
The victory completed a remarkable journey for Taylor, who began boxing at a time when girls were barred from amateur competition in Ireland and sometimes entered bouts simply as "K Taylor".
She went on to win Olympic lightweight gold at London 2012, when women's boxing made its Games debut, before turning professional four years later.
Taylor finishes her professional career with 26 victories and one defeat, having won world titles at lightweight and super-lightweight.
Her farewell also brought top-level boxing back to Croke Park for the first time since Muhammad Ali defeated Al "Blue" Lewis in 1972.
Following the fight, she placed her gloves in the centre of the ring to mark her retirement, while her team assisted her in assembling her belts around them.
Addressing the buoyant crowd, she said: "Croke Park! We did it," said Taylor as she saluted the crowd. "I don't know of any other country that would sell 80,000 tickets."
She later added: "The people of Ireland gave me a dream end to a dream career. Nothing can top this. This was definitely the highlight of my whole career.
"I didn't think anything could get bigger than London 2012 and then MSG came along. I didn't think anything could get bigger than that first fight with Serrano and then here we are at Croke Park. I ended my career on top, like every athlete wants to do, on my terms, and I ended it as the undisputed champion.
"I don't think there's another country in the world that would sell 80,000 tickets for a female athlete. I'm convinced Ireland was the only country that would actually do that. What a way to end this amazing journey.
"I started off this career and I had the dream of becoming an Olympic champion. I achieved that, but then these last 10 years have been beyond my wildest dreams. It's been a remarkable 10 years."