Points deduction puts Leicestershire on brink as Warwickshire go top: County Championship cricket, day two - as it happened
It was advantage Warwickshire at the top but the most significant action came off the pitch, with Leicestershire all but relegated after a points deduction
Roundup: Warwickshire win but points deduction puts Leicestershire on brink
It was advantage Warwickshire at the top but perhaps the most significant action of the day came off the pitch and at the bottom, with Leicestershire all but relegated after a points deduction.
The Cricket Regulator had charged Leicestershire after the Grace Road pitch was rated as poor for last month's win against Glamorgan. The cricket discipline panel has upheld the charge, leading to the deduction of the 19 points picked up for the victory plus eight more as a penalty. A Leicestershire statement said "the club is reviewing its position and considering all available options", but the deduction left them bottom of the table, 38 points adrift of the last safe spot. With Hampshire 225 ahead with seven wickets standing, Leicestershire's hopes in what is now a must-win match are slim.
Warwickshire flourish a 19-point hand on the table and wait after a second two-day victory in succession. Essex, further weakened by overnight substitutions to Shane Snater and Tom Westley, gave them the upper hand by conceding another 40 runs for the last wicket, thanks largely to an unbeaten 88 from Sam Hain. The Indian spinner Manav Suthar, with five for 75, and Chris Woakes, with three for 33, were too hot for Essex and Warwickshire easily knocked off the 133 needed.
The morning bell at Chelmsford was rung by the BBC's Dick Davies, retiring after 31 years covering Essex cricket. Up at Headingley, Craig Overton continued his one-man attempt to haul Somerset over the line. His 64 not out, full of humpty and grace, rescued his team from the doldrums of 86 for eight, in companionship with Migael Pretorius, who found his long-lost batting form with a free-flowing 58.
Overton was last man out to Ben Cliff's, whose astonishing eight for 76 were the best bowling figures for a Yorkshireman at Headingley since Graham Stevenson's eight for 57 in 1980. He led Yorkshire off grinning, applauding teammates behind.
Overton soon spoiled their fun, nobbling Will Luxton's middle stump with his second ball, and removing Adam Lyth a couple of overs later. Jonny Bairstow came and went to a Nureyev catch at cover by Archie Vaughan but George Hill and Dom Bess stopped the rot with an unbroken seventh-wicket stand of 74 as spectators in the East Stand enjoyed some afternoon sun to stretch Yorkshire's lead to 139.
At Hove, Nottinghamshire were held up by an obdurate Sussex, who picked up the only Division One batting point of the round thanks to half centuries for Tom Clark, Charlie Tear and Tom Price.
Kent need 56 to beat Lancashire and get their promotion points on the board. Zak Crawley (84) and Matt Milnes (40 not out) ushered Kent to a first-innings lead of 53, before Milnes had a go with the ball and helped chisel Lancashire out for 192. Sam Northeast and Tawanda Muyeye took Kent towards a good night's sleep.
Asa Tribe's first hundred of the season, on a wicket where 20 wickets had fallen the day before, eased Glamorgan's relegation nerves, even before the Leicestershire news.
It's dark outside the Headingley press box, the white covers just visible through the gloom. Well played Warwickshire, what a late-season run. We'll be here tomorrow to see if Somerset can catch them, and more. Thanks for your company, have a lovely evening.
Stumps at Headingley too, with Hill and Bess threatening to take this Somerset total into the worrying category for Somerset. Yorks 128 for six, lead by 139. Time for me to write up for the paper.
A huge farewell to Dick who is about to finish commentating on BBC Essex after 31 years. A gentle, knowledgable presence. Have a wonderful retirement .
At Grace Road Nick Gubbins is undefeated on 124 at stumps. Hampshire's best day for a long time, and they can sleep on a lead of 225, with seven wickets in hand.
Warwickshire are going to win in two days again, to chalk those points on the slate. They've lost Yates, for 33, but only need 46 to sends Essex's season sliding closer to the trap door.
Applause round Headingley as the Yorkshire lead reaches three figures. And now we have Jack Leach.
Three wickets each for Khaled, Milnes and Dudgeon at Canterbury in Lancs' 192 all out. Harris (48) and Jones (54) propped the innings up. With promotion dangling, can Kent buckle through?
A first hundred of a tricky season for Nick Gubbins! Grace Road has lost its daemons and Hampshire lead Leicestershire by 200, eight wickets in hand.
And a nice stat from the ACS: Hants teammate Aneurin Donald is the first person with his forename to play any format of international cricket (the most famous achievement by anyone of that name is founding the UK's National Health Service).
They're sunbathing in the East Stand as young colt George Hill keeps Yorkshire roses in bloom. Kevin Howells drops another bon mots as he sips on his press box coffee "if Somerset do go on to win the Championship it will be impossible to overstate the role of Craig Overton." There he stands at second slip, arms crossed, boots two metres apart.
"Hello Tanya. Sweating over Bears prospects here in Mozambique, but Somerset seem indomitable. I saw just a day's County cricket this year, at Trent Bridge in April. Big score from Warks, but unwise to enforce follow on and knacker your bowlers. Nottingham people may be the most friendly in England. I read Ashes hype, already, but world champions first! I will be on a grassy bank in Pretoria (before Christmas this year) and Joburg." I'm very envious! An intriguing series.
Khaled and Dudgeon are chipping away at Lancashire who are 163-7. A negligible but not improper lead of 110 with Jimmy, Stanley and Balderson waiting to bowl.
Gregory bends the knee and nods his head, like a joyful mountain goat. Abell gobbles up again at second slip as Whiteman is sent on his way for a dutiful 35. Yorks 54 for six.
Somerset think Gregory has two in two but the umpire says no.
Archie Vaughan takes a stupendous leaping catch in the covers to send YJB on his way, then runs about with a cap in his hand like a 1950's schoolboy as he is mobbed by his teammates. Yorkshire 45 for five. Gregory the bowler.
Essex have folded for 189. Five for Suthan, three for Woakes. Can Essex, without Shane Snater, without Jamie Porter, without Simon Harmer do anything to stop the bears. Simon Cook is partnered by 17 year old Jack Auld.
Somerset swarm with a skip and a hop as Revis finally falls for a dogged, 41-ball two. He nibbles at Ball and Abell does the rest. Yorks 40 for four. A bow legged figure strides onto the grass.
According to Richard Gibson's reports in the Daily Mail, there will be four Championship fixtures next June and July to give England's Ashes players more access to red-ball practice around the series. It compares with two matches in June this year.
There are three Someset slips to Ball. All of them wearing cream cable knit sweaters. Revis has a sudden swish and miss. Around the stands are clusters of fans in quiet absorption. Yorkshire 31 for three.
After all the pre-season hype, a Championship century at last for Tribe, and it might just secure first-division cricket for Glamorgan next year. Glamorgan 240 for three.
I meant to post this round preview from Gary Naylor, yesterday. The umpires are walking out at Headingley, and the groundstaff immediately start to haul in the sheets.
Right - let's trot around the grounds whille they take an early tea at Headingley, now in bright sunshine.
Warwickshire look like being first over the finishing line, after reducing Essex to 139 for five in their second innings, a lead of just 82.
Hampshire are fighting back at Grace Road after Leicestershire picked up a first-innings lead of 30. A fifty for Nick Gubbins leading the way in 113-1.
Kiran Carlson has just been out for 57 at The Oval but Tribe still there on 88. Glamorgan 210-3, lead Surrey by 227.
Notts have winkled out Tom Clark for 89, but Sussex are staying strong at 170-3, trail Notts by 68.
Apropros of nothing, I read a lovely piece on the late great Rob Steen this morning, by Huw Richards in the latest Nightwatchman. Suddenly they're coming off at Headingley for rain - Yorkshire 26 for three. Quite a lot of rain actually. Leeds suddenly disappearing into the gloom.
Stephen Moss (that one) writes in to say that he later found out, and was sad to miss, that a fox appeared at The Oval yesterday and briefly stopped play. It's a different gravy in south London today, where Glamorgan have eased to 189-2 - Tribe 82 not out, Carlson 43 not out. The lead over Surrey, 206.
Nicholls makes no mistake at first slip as Adam Lyth mis-dabs. Overton, of course. Hands on hips, he is already walking back to his mark. Yorkshire five for two.
The clouds were gathering around Headingley at lunch and Somerset were out in the middle, stretching, bowling, catching.
Thanks to Chris Waters of the Yorkshire Post for the lowdown on Ben Cliff. His figures were the best for a Yorkshireman since Craig White's 8-55 at Glos in 1998, and the best at Headingley since Graham Stevenson's 8-57 v Northants in 1980.