Right, time to take a break till qualifying, at 2.30pm BST. Here's a quick report:
Max Verstappen won a wet and wild Singapore sprint race for Red Bull on Saturday after George Russell crashed his Mercedes when leading at the end of the opening lap. Verstappen held off Ferrari's Lewis Hamilton to win by 2.50sec with Charles Leclerc third as the McLarens of Lando Norris and Oscar Piastri touched and spun on the final lap when fourth and fifth.
A heavy shower 10 minutes before the scheduled start meant a delay of 30 minutes. All cars began on intermediate tyres with some sectors of the Marina Bay Street Circuit much dryer than others as the field embarked on two formation laps behind the safety car.
The eventual standing start saw Russell start on the front row alongside pole-sitter Verstappen, and it was the Englishman who got away better. His lead was short-lived as he lost control after touching a treacherous white line on the final bend of the opening lap. He slid sideways into the pit lane wall, bringing out a safety car.
It was another setback in a season of bad luck for Russell, who will start from the back of the grid in Sunday's grand prix because of engine penalties. "It was a miscalculation," Russell admitted to Sky Sports. "Came through the corner, had more battery deployment than I thought, pushed me a little bit wider than I hoped and went on to the white line. Silly mistake. Big consequences."
It left Hamilton, who had a brilliant start from sixth on the grid, in second place having leapfrogged his Ferrari teammate Leclerc and the two McLarens.
The big beneficiary of Norris and Piastri's "papaya spat" on the last lap was the championship leader, Kimi Antonelli, who inherited fourth place in his Mercedes having started seventh on the grid.
Fifth was RB's Liam Lawson, sixth was the Haas of Oliver Bearman, seventh was Audi's Nico Hülkenberg and Norris got going again to limp home in eighth and round out the points scorers. AFP
Plenty for the teams to chew over, and plenty to do for McLaren. See you later.
Stella with a face like thunder, apparently, as he stormed in. Ted Kravitz points out the damage in the constructors' standings, where McLaren could slip from champions to fourth.
Back to Norris's crash. Piastri says he's not that bothered, given what was at stake - fourth and fifth in a sprint. But that's quite damning for Norris. Why did he make a high-risk move for such a low reward?
It's only eight points. "I want to win tomorrow, not today." Verstappen bats away compliments over winning on every circuit - sprints don't really count.
And now Verstappen, who has now won on every F1 track he has competed on. "The start was horrendous again, so that's obviously something we need to improve on, because if you have something like that tomorrow that's your race over ... But we got a bit lucky with what happened with George ... After that you just want to keep it a bit calm. You can't pass around here, especially in conditions like this with the intermediates."
Hamilton's turn. "As soon as the heavens opened, 'This is a great day.' I tried to get close to him [Verstappen] without killing my tyres, I was reining him in." But then the tyre problems kicked in and "it's a tough track to overtake".
David Coulthard talks to Leclerc first and asks about tyre degradation. "Struggled a lot from mid-race onwards ... When it dried up I was nowhere." He was relieved the McLarens messed up as he was really struggling.
The problem for the McLaren pair was that Antonelli was so close to Norris that he almost had to push. But that was a mess for them. He did get going again and took eighth. Piastri will be angry.
17/20. This is drifting. Except Norris is closing on Piastri. But Brundle points out that the McLarens can't afford any contact in this tight run of races.
A couple of points of consolation for Russell. It was only the sprint, not the main race, and the damage did not seem to be too bad. But he will be starting from the back tomorrow and is seeing right now how difficult overtaking can be, albeit on intermediates in drying conditions.
Brundle pours, er, cold water on the idea of anyone changing to slicks, because to overtake you would need to go off-line, which means you would find water. "We just want to see something, to be honest," says Croft.
"Bleep. Sorry." "Are you all right?" "Ah ... Yeah, I'm fine. Sorry, sorry, sorry." In a year of misfortunes, that was simply an error by Russell, unfortunately. White Lines (Don't Don't Do It).