Pick of the week
Ignore That Feeling
Comedians Fern Brady and Alison Spittle return for a second series of comically chaotic chat. Expect plenty of wildly pinballing discussions with no theme other than what pops into their heads. Topics so far include Robert De Niro's much younger partner, podcasts about nuns playing ultimate frisbee - and Brady on how "so many of Bonnie Blue's views are so close to mine". Business as usual, then. Alexi Duggins
Widely available, episodes weekly
A View from a Bridge
Joe Bloom's online series, which features strangers divulging their thoughts on matters big and small via a red telephone, was a viral hit. This relaunch has big names such as David Byrne on a tantalising false memory. But it also retains the ordinary encounters that made it so special to begin with. Hannah J Davies
Widely available, episodes weekly
Skinwigs
This off-the-wall chat between comedians and pals Sam O'Leary and Ash Tyson is daft, rambling fun. It's an often surreal, delightfully awkward listen full of corpsing, bizarre ads from fictitious sponsors and the occasional ludicrous musical interlude. AD
Widely available, episodes weekly
Karel Prince: Lie Detector
Karel Prince - the seasoned BS detector behind the HMRC of Football podcast - leads this lighthearted quizshow, beginning with two made-up stories and one real one submitted by ex-Man United player Brian McClair. But should Prince and co-presenter Anita Abayomi be imagining Sir Alex Ferguson as a "red-faced" taskmaster or a "soft, kind, tender man"? HJD
BBC Sounds, episodes weekly
Resurrection: The Ghost Writer
In this tender, intimate third series of his podcast, Dane Stewart tells the story of his grandmother's death. The first of three episodes starts with a candid conversation with his father, before reflecting on how the work of American writer Joel Redon - who wrote about Aids, which he died of in the 90s - helped him to navigate caregiving and grief. Hollie Richardson
Widely available, all episodes out now