When Shane MacGowan died in 2023, you'd be forgiven for wondering whether the Pogues could carry on, given what a singular frontman he was - and given the band had been dormant since 2014. But grounded by original members James Fearnley, Jem Finer and Spider Stacy, the Pogues have been playing hugely acclaimed reunion gigs in recent years with various guests sitting in for MacGowan - and as they go on a greatest hits tour around the UK this autumn, Fearnley and Stacy will be joining us to answer your questions.
The Pogues' history stretches back to the late 70s when MacGowan, Stacy and Finer played together in London; Fearnley, meanwhile, was a member of MacGowan's punk band the Nips. The Pogues eventually formed in 1982, investing the traditional music of their Irish heritage with the energy of the city's punk scene.
They released debut album Red Roses for Me in 1984, the following year's Rum Sodomy & the Lash took them into the UK Top 20, and then 1987 brought Fairytale of New York, their eternally popular Christmas song. The brilliant but wayward MacGowan was eventually fired from the group in 1991, and Joe Strummer stepped in for a time before being replaced by Stacy; the band soldiered on for another couple of albums before splitting in 1996.
But while there have been no more studio albums, the Pogues reformed in 2001 and played on and off until 2014. After MacGowan's death, the richness of the band's catalogue and the originality of their takes on Irish folk standards was brought into renewed relief; concerts celebrating 40 years since Red Roses for Me were warmly received, with the Guardian's Patrick Clarke saying in a five-star review of a London date: "It could so easily have been a pale imitation, glorified karaoke. And yet, it's utterly triumphant."
Their greatest hits tour promises a "superlative collection of special guest musicians and singers, among them the cream of the current generation of Irish artists", and before it kicks off on 28 November, Fearnley and Stacy will answer your questions about the band's history and future. Post them in the comments below before 4pm BST on Monday 28 September, and their answers will be published later in the week.