A cross is sent into the box and Medina attempts to head it clear, but the ball only runs as far as Bronze, who shifts it to Walsh on her left. The midfielder sets herself up before unleashing a brilliant effort into the bottom-left corner.
29 min: Thompson plays a brilliant one-two with James on the left before running on the overlap and crossing the ball into the danger zone. Kaptein is there, but Miyazawa gets in front to head it away.
26 min: United break forward again as Park skips past McCabe before looking for the cross, but Buchanan makes the block to send the ball out for a corner.
24 min: Manchester United look to find a quick equaliser straight from kick-off as the ball is played through to Jusu Bah, who looks to break into the box but is flagged offside.
23 min: Chelsea unpick the Manchester United defence as Bronze sends a lofted pass into the box. Janssen completely mis-times the header, allowing Kaptein to take possession before squaring the ball across to Nüsken, who taps it in from close range.
19 min: Chelsea make their way into the box once again, but they almost try to walk the ball into the net! At least four players in Blue find themselves in a position to shoot but play it elsewhere. That might feel like an opportunity missed.
16 min: James puts the ball on a plate for Kaptein with a perfect cross from the left. The midfielder heads it towards goal, but there's not enough conviction on it and Tullis-Joyce makes the save.
14 min: James receives the ball on the left side of the box after making a run over from the right. She cuts inside onto her right foot and unleashes a strike from the edge of the box, but it floats over the crossbar.
9 min: Chelsea seem to be operating in a 3-5-2 formation, with Nüsken and James the two leading the line. Bronze, Buchanan and McCabe are the back three.
6 min: The ball is brilliantly switched over to Jusu Bah on the left, who looks to make a run into the box, but Hampton rushes off her line to collect.
4 min: Bronze wins the ball back for Chelsea on the right side with a perfectly-timed challenge on Medina, who appeals for a free kick. Absolutely nothing wrong with that tackle. Play continues.
Ahead of today's match, Chelsea head coach Sonia Bompastor said: "We need to keep the confidence and keep working hard. I spoke after the Villa game about the mentality, the mindset. It's a huge part of being ruthless in the box. That game could have been easily 3-0 half-time, and we need to have that mentality when we have the opportunities to kill the game after 45 minutes to do that.
"This week I was coaching the players in the final details: around timings of the runs in the box, being in the right zones, what type of crosses do we want to deliver, what are the connections between the crosser and the players who are making the runs in the box.
"It's just for me to reinforce those messages, to coach them on the pitch, and make sure we get them right on the game on the weekend."
"Don't panic; that has to be United's message. To an extent, it is very early to be writing the team's obituary. The new head coach, Eva Olid, had only three weeks to try to implement her ideas about the way the team should play before that match against London City Lionesses on Friday 4 September. That is not long enough for her to peel away Marc Skinner's imprint on the team..."
In her pre-match press conference, Manchester United head coach Eva Olid said: "I expect us to be confident with the ball, everyone showing we want to have the ball. It's everything like that, not just about confidence.
"Of course we know they are good and there will be moments we have to defend, but we want to attack too, we want to put them in difficult situations where we hurt them, and that is the main focus.
"When we have the ball, we enjoy the ball, and we really have confidence to create chances, put them in difficult situations and hope that we can score goals too."
In case you missed it, London City Lionesses suffered a 2-1 defeat to West Ham yesterday. Kelly Gago and Viviane Asseyi were on target for the Hammers at the Chigwell Construction Stadium.
Melvine Malard is not available to face her former club today after suffering a knock in training. The Blues are also without Mayra Ramirez and Manaka Matsukubo.
Meanwhile, Jayde Riviere and Emma Watson are absent from the Manchester United squad.
Manchester United starting XI: Phallon Tullis-Joyce; Hanna Lundkvist, Maya Le Tissier (C), Dominique Janssen, Andrea Medina; Hinata Miyazawa, Julia Zigiotti; Jess Park, Ella Toone, Monica Jusu Bah; Elisabeth Terland.
Subs: Janina Leitzig, Scarlett Hill, Anna Sandberg, Jess Simpson, Jess Anderson, Simi Awujo, Rebeca Bernal, Mared Griffiths, Lea Schüller.
Hello and welcome to coverage of the WSL meeting between Manchester United and Chelsea. Both teams dropped points in their opening games last weekend, with United suffering a 2-1 loss to London City Lionesses and Chelsea held to a 1-1 draw by Aston Villa at Stamford Bridge.
Today presents a completely different challenge. The Blues have won five of their last six games against United, with the remaining fixture resulting in a draw.
However, given it's just the start of a new campaign, anything can happen.