It's been the weakest August for Britain's housing market since 2018, as sellers slash their prices in search of a buyer.
New data from Rightmove showed that the average price of a newly-listed home in Britain fell by 2% this month to £364,999 - that's a much larger drop than in a typical August.
The decline means average asking prices are now 1.0% lower than a year ago. Rightmove also cut its forecast for house price growth this year to between 0% and -2%, down from a previous forecast of 2% growth.
Yet more bad news for sellers, for whom it has been a difficult year - but a boost for buyers...
VirginTrains was granted track access by the rail regulator to run new services between London and Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam from 2030.
In a step forward for Virgin's plans to break's Eurostar's passenger monopoly on the cross-Channel route, the Office of Rail and Road (ORR) said it had approved up to 20 new daily return services through the Channel tunnel.
The agreement, which covers 1 October 2030 to 31 December 2040, means Sir Richard Branson's company has passed another important regulatory hurdle towards starting the international services.
Massive Attack and Brian Eno were among 200 musicians to write to Andy Burnham urging him to reject plans for more North Sea oil and gas drilling.
The letter, signed by 211 artists such as Radiohead's Thom Yorke and the xx singerRomy, called on the prime minister to reject the Rosebank oilfield, warning that the project would fail to lower energy bills or provide energy security.
The government's consultation on the project, which lies about 80 miles north-west of the ShetlandIslands, closed on Monday. Ministers will now decide on its future as well as that of the Jackdaw gasfield off Aberdeen, whose consultation concluded a week ago.
JamieDimon, the boss of the US bank JP Morgan, urged John Healey not to use his first budget as chancellor to increase taxes on banks' bumper profits.
Dimon told Healey in a phone conversation that higher levies could hit jobs, citing a fall in finance roles in New York that he blamed on the city's tax regime.
The call came after growing speculation that a windfall tax could be imposed on UK lenders to fund Andy Burnham's cost of living agenda, with campaigners estimating such a move could raise £19bn.
Concerns over rising prices and government spending pushed up the cost of debt issued by Paris, Berlin, Washington DC, Tokyo and London, as investors fretted it would push up interest rates.
The yield, or interest rate, on 30-year French bonds rose to its highest level since September 2008 at 4.8558%, up one basis point (0.01 percentage point), LSEG data showed.
But though we may face shortages of grain, potatoes and vegetables, the wineries are celebrating a vintage year.
Three Choirs Vineyards in Gloucestershire are celebrating what they describes as "excellent conditions" for their 75 acres of vines.
Winemaker MartinFowke, said:
"It was wet early on in the year and so growth was rapid. Since early June it has been dry and hot. We are not irrigating the vines, as we don't want to dilute the crop, although we are watering the young vines that aren't cropping yet.
The vines are very forward and so there is scope for producing some very good wines again this year".
16 people will be hand picking the ripe, sweet and juicy grapes during the harvest which is coming up soon.
The vineyard currently produces 250,000 bottles of wine a year. Best sellers include Classic Cuvee, Coleridge Hill, Rose and Bacchus.
Government bond yields rise as markets anticipate interest rate hikes
Government borrowing costs in France, Germany and Japan are all hitting multi-year highs today, as investors fear the Middle East crisis will keep inflation persistently high.
The yield, or interest rate, on 30-year French bonds has risen to its highest level since September 2008 - the start of the financial crisis - at 4.8558%, up one basis point (0.01 percentage point) today, Reuters reports.
France's 10-year bond yield has hit its highest level since June 2009, up 1 bp to 4.0516%. The equivalent German bond has hit its highest yield since 2011 at 3.2138%, up 1.5bps.
The real drama is in Tokyo, though, where the 10-year Japanese government bond yield hit a three-decade high. The 10-year JGB yield rose to 2.93%, its highest level since September 1996, before dipping back slightly after Japan's GDP report came in weaker than expected (see earlier post).
Fears that central banks will continue to tighten monetary policy, to prevent inflation bursting out of control, are pushing up bond yields - as traders seek a higher rate of return for holding government debt.
Axel Rudolph, chief technical analyst at IG, explains:
"Japan's 10-year bond yield has surged to its highest level since 1996, as markets increasingly price in a Bank of Japan rate hike as soon as September.
The irony is that this comes despite weaker-than-expected GDP, with soft domestic demand raising questions over the strength of the recovery. Persistent yen weakness and inflation pressures are strengthening the case for action, while uncertainty over how the government will fund its proposed food tax cut adds another layer of fiscal concern.
Japan's bond market is clearly becoming less forgiving, and the BOJ may soon have to choose between supporting a fragile economy and containing inflation."
Over in Canada, inflation has picked up, lifted by higher prices for motor fuel.
The Canadian Consumer Price Index (CPI) rose 3.0% year over year in July, up from a 2.8% gain in June.
Statistics Canada reports that higher prices for gasoline and travel tours in July pushed inflation higher, while food prices rose at a slower rate.
On a yearly basis, prices for gasoline jumped by over 25%, up from 20.5% in the year to June.
"The conflict in the Middle East, including the blockade of the Strait of Hormuz and the partial closure of Red Sea shipping routes in late July, put upward pressure on gasoline prices," today's inflation report says.
The first person to buy Ferrari's polarising new electric supercar is reportedly an American billionaire optometrist who bid $40m (£29.5m) for the vehicle in an auction for charity.
Dr Herbert "Herbie" Wertheim, who has an estimated fortune of $4.9bn, bought the tailor-made edition of the car last week at Monterey Car Week, according to the Telegraph.
Often seen wearing a red fedora, Wertheim, 87, is a self-made billionaire who struggled at school but went on to found the optical equipment maker Brain Power Inc in 1971, and launch a philanthropic foundation six years later.
The car is only expected to sell for €550,000 (£470,000) when it is released commercially next year, so the auction price may yet provide some cheer for Ferrari's embattled top brass, who saw shares in the company fall 8% when it was revealed to the public.
Its launch imagery drew unwelcome comparisons to the latest version of the Nissan Leaf, while Luca di Montezemolo, who led Ferrari for 23 years, said at the time: "We're risking the destruction of a legend."
Senior Russian banker fired after scathing speech on wartime economy
The chief economist at Russia's second-largest bank has been fired after a series of critical comments about the state of the economy, including warnings that Moscow would not win a prolonged economic war with Ukraine.
Andrei Klepach, who had served in the role at the state-controlled development bank VEB since 2014, was fired days after Russian media reported on a scathing speech he had delivered to fellow economists in May.
In the remarks, first reported by the Moscow Times, Klepach said Russia was "falling behind" China and the US economically, and "in some respects, Ukraine".
Klepach said pressures on Russia's economy due to the war would inevitably lead to a "social crisis" that would erupt "when no one particularly expects it".
It's not terribly unusual for economists attract criticism for their views, but rare for them to be fired over them.
In 2019, UBS economist Paul Donovan was briefly suspended, after commenting that a swine flu outbreak only "matters if you are a Chinese pig" or "if you like eating pork in China" - remarks wrongly interpreted to be racist.
And in January, Deutsche Bank's George Saravelos upset Washington after writing that Donald Trump's trade war threats could spur European investors could sell US assets.
In other energy news, French daily power prices have hit their highest since January 2025.
Bloomberg reports that day-ahead French power prices for Monday advanced to €177.34 a megawatt-hour, according to data from Epex Spot.
This is blamed on heat-related outages at France's nuclear plants - several had to close due to rising water temperatures and falling river levels (and a swarm of jellyfish) - and cloudier conditions in Europe which curbed solar generation.
The TUC has criticised JP Morgan's CEO for his opposition to higher bank taxes (see earlier post).
TUC general secretary Paul Nowak said this morning:
"Let's be clear. Jamie Dimon doesn't want banks like his to pay their fair share. But while bank profits continue to soar, ordinary working people are paying more in bigger bills and higher mortgage rates.
"People are sick and tired of being told they have to tighten their belts while profits, dividends and bankers' bonuses hit record highs. The new Chancellor has a clear opportunity to show working people he's on their side by asking banks to pay fair taxes to cut energy bills."
Oil and gas prices rise as Hormuz shipping activity slows again
Alex Daniel
Oil and gas prices are heading higher again this morning after reduced traffic through the Strait of Hormuz and rising concerns that a ceasefire may not be imminent in the region.
The number of ships passing through the strait ground virtually to a halt over the weekend after fresh attacks on oil tankers last week.
Data from the ship-tracking company Kpler said only five commodity vessels passed through the waterway on Saturday, while none were recorded on Sunday. That's compared with 31 the weekend before.
Brent crude was trading at about $89.49 per barrel, up 1.1%. Gas prices were also up, with the UK's one month ahead benchmark at 153p per therm, or 1.36% up.
More than 200 musicians including Massive Attack and Brian Eno have written to Andy Burnham, urging him to reject plans for more oil and gas drilling in the North Sea.
The letter, signed by artists such as Olly Alexander and Paris Paloma, called on the prime minister to reject the Rosebank oilfield, warning the project will fail to lower energy bills or provide energy security as most of the oil is likely to be exported.
The government's consultation on the project, which lies about 80 miles north-west of the Shetland Islands, closed on Monday. Ministers will now decide on its future as well as that of the Jackdaw gasfield off Aberdeen, whose consultation concluded a week ago.
Adura, the company behind both projects, has said the projects would result in £10.8bn in investment and support 3,500 jobs at the peak of construction, with 880 employees over its production lifetime.