Uefa is preparing to make a criminal complaint against Gianni Infantino for alleged "criminal mismanagement" in connection with his failed Fifa Forward Enterprise plan and has applied for the release of documents related to its conception.
In an explosive escalation of the war engulfing football's governing bodies, Uefa has made separate applications in the United States for information, including from Fifa and the investment firm Thrive Capital.
The request explains Uefa and other interested parties are "preparing to bring criminal claims in Switzerland against Infantino and possible other Fifa officials and advisers for criminal mismanagement under Article 158 of the Swiss Criminal Code".
Thrive Capital, led by Joshua Kushner, was to be the lead investor in Infantino's plan. Uefa has used a "section 1782" order in seeking release of the relevant documents. Such a request lets an interested party in a foreign legal proceeding ask for discovery of information from an entity based in the US.
The court documents pay particular attention to the "absurdly low enterprise value of only approximately $20bn" (£14.7bn) implied by Infantino's scheme to sell a 20% chunk of Fifa tournaments for $4.2bn. The figure is claimed to be "neither the product of an open, competitive auction, nor tested by any independent valuer".
Uefa claims "a valuation exceeding $30bn is readily supportable" through assessment of Fifa's financial performance and market conditions. Additionally, comparisons are drawn with the deal Infantino pursued in 2018 with a consortium led by the Japanese firm SoftBank. The submission points out that the proposal, which was dropped, would have committed about $25bn for a 12-year interest in the Nations League and an expanded Club World Cup.
Infantino is accused of a "stunning dereliction of duty" in sidelining the Fifa Council when tabling the plan. In a surgical walk-through of what is known about FFE's conception and its withdrawal, the documents also highlight the expedited timeline member associations were given to back the scheme and the $40m "inducement" they were offered to do so.
This month Uefa's lawyers had told Infantino and Fifa to "take immediate steps to identify, locate and preserve all documents and electronically stored information described in this notice that are in your or Fifa's possession, custody, or control". They had named 14 executives who were required to "specifically preserve all such materials in their possession, custody, or control".
On Thursday Uefa filed a request for discovery in US District Court for the Eastern District of New York, which if granted would enable it to subpoena Kushner and Thrive for documents relating to Fifa's FFE proposal, and allow Uefa attorneys to depose Kushner.
In a 56-page filing that contains a section headlined "the enduring history of corruption among Fifa officials", Uefa's attorneys describe FFE as "a vehicle for Infantino and that small circle to acquire a permanent stake in and otherwise profit from Fifa's most valuable assets to the detriment of Fifa, its members, and other parties within the football family".
Uefa clarifies that "neither Thrive nor Kushner is an anticipated defendant in the contemplated Swiss criminal proceeding".
Uefa's executive committee and about 35 presidents of its members were informed of the latest developments at a meeting in Monte Carlo on Thursday, shortly before the Champions League draw. It was also confirmed that, as reported by the Guardian, the proposed boycott of Fifa tournaments has been shelved after Fifa provided the necessary assurances that no version of FFE would be tabled. "This position will remain under constant review and may be reconsidered immediately if circumstances so require," Uefa said.
The statement said Uefa proposed to explore using funds from Fifa's reserves, estimated to total about $5bn, to benefit its member associations. Uefa also confirmed its intention to ensure Infantino faces an opponent if he is still in position when the election for Fifa's leadership is held in March.
"Should the current Fifa president nevertheless seek another mandate, Uefa will join forces with its partner confederations to ensure that member associations are offered a credible alternative - one committed to integrity, accountability, development and genuine institutional change," it said.
Fifa and Thrive Capital have been contacted for comment.