Myles Lewis-Skelly has been offered to Manchester United as a potential left-back option, with Arsenal wishing to recoup some of the £75m paid to Newcastle for Bruno Guimarães.
Chelsea, it is understood, have also been made aware of the 19-year-old's availability. Lewis-Skelly won the Premier League under Mikel Arteta last term, but whether the west London club will make a move for him is unclear.
Lewis-Skelly, who made only five league starts and 36 appearances in all competitions in 2025-26, signed a five-year contract last summer. His prospective price is thought to be in the region of £45m.
This is within the range of finance United have spent so far this summer, after Youri Tielemans's £35m move from Aston Villa and Andrey Santos's arrival for £48m plus £2m of add-ons from Chelsea. United are now weighing up a move for the teenager.
Newcastle's Lewis Hall remains of prime interest for United but, after losing Guimarães, Sandro Tonali to Tottenham, and Anthony Gordon to Barcelona, the new Newcastle manager, Matthias Jaissle, is intent the 21-year-old England international does not also depart
RB Leipzig's 28-year-old left-back David Raum is another in the position United may assess.
Chelsea have already had a busy summer in the market, having spent over £300m on a raft of new signings. Maxence Lacroix and Marco Palestra have been brought in to bolster the centre and right of the defence respectively, while Morgan Rogers became the club's record signing at a cost of £117m.
But Xabi Alonso's side have a hole on the left of their defence after Marc Cucurella's £52m move to Real Madrid. The 20-year-old Jorrel Hato, who featured for the Netherlands at the World Cup, was Cucurella's deputy at left-back.
Mason Mount missed training on Monday and Tuesday at United's County Kildare summer training camp owing to a knock he received on a foot in Saturday's 1-1 draw with Paris Saint-Germain in Gothenburg.
The the 27-year-old midfielder being stood down is a precautionary measure, it is understood, and he is also set to sit out Wednesday's penultimate pre-season friendly against Leeds at Croke Park. The game at the 81,300 capacity venue is a sell-out.
United's final friendly before Michael Carrick's team start the season on Saturday week at Hull is against Milan in Wroclaw on Saturday.