And so we reach the end of a long, hot summer. England won every series they played in except one, the three-Test tussle with New Zealand, which went so badly wrong that Ben Stokes resigned as the Test captain and Brendon McCullum was sacked as the Test coach.
Joe Root went from being a great ex-captain, reeling off hundreds, to an unexpected Test captain again, winning every game but unable to reach three figures. Stephen Fleming was appointed Test coach but didn't actually start, flying over just to say hello and make the right noises.
Jofra Archer went from being kept in cotton wool to playing almost every game and once again bowling so fast that it was thrilling to watch. Ollie Robinson returned and took so many wickets so cheaply that, as Andy Bull memorably said, he could have been wearing a top hat. Throw in Josh Tongue's ability to blow away the tail and Gus Atkinson's steep bounce, and England just may have another fab four to rival the one from 2005.
Jordan Cox announced himself as a rising star, whatever the colour of the ball, whether batting or standing in as a keeper for Jamie Smith or Jos Buttler. Harry Brook continued to bat like a dream and also began to look like a proper captain, showing just the right amount of bravery. And, today, Tom Banton made his big breakthrough.
For all the embarrassment of their after-hours escapades, England also have another kind of embarrassment - of riches. They have a generation of young cricketers who are talented and likeable and seem comfortable on the big stage. It should be a lot of fun seeing how far they can go.
England are going all over the place this winter, starting with some ODIs in Pakistan in about three weeks' time - also involving Sri Lanka. We will of course be back to bring you those. For now, thanks for your company and correspondence, all summer long. The OBO community is a wonderful thing.
The England players gather round Brook as he lifts the trophy. They have won all of their white-ball series this summer - two against the mighty India, two against the less mighty but still gifted Sri Lanka.
Harry Brook is talking to Mark Butcher. "A near-perfect performance," he says. "Bants, obviously, an outstanding knock." He also praises Jordan Cox for "a great cameo". Some cameo: 76 off 52 balls.
It's time for some awards. The Player of the Match isn't hard to work out: it is, of course, Tom Banton, for his first England century, a magnificent 126. The Player of the Series is more of a puzzle. Harry Brook? No, it's his new vice-captain, Will Jacks, who kept chipping in with bat or ball.
Harry Brook used seven bowlersand they all took a wicket - except Jofra Archer, who pulled off a sizzling run-out. It's been a satisfying day for Brook, who surprised everyone by opting to bat first and then took another punt by handing the new ball to Sonny Baker, who took a wicket with his second delivery. In between, Brook got through a sticky start to make a majestic 77 on a pitch that was testing enough to make Joe Root struggle.
Malinga c Root b Jacks 14 (Sri Lanka 132 all out) Joe Root, at leg slip, takes a sharp catch, swallowing a sweep to complete a resounding victory. England have won the match by 223 runs and the series by 2-1. Tom Banton, the star of the show, leads England off.
29th over: Sri Lanka 132-9 (Malinga 14, Madushanka 2) Eshan Malinga decides that he may as well go down fighting. Facing Dawson, he plays a late steer for four and a smack through the covers for four more.
28th over: Sri Lanka 123-9 (Malinga 5, Madushanka 2) Back comes Will Jacks, who was the first spinner used in this innings and then found himself rather forgotten once the collapse unfolded. Sri Lanka were 77-3, so from that moment on they lost six wickets for 43.
27th over: Sri Lanka 120-9 (Malinga 4, Madushanka 0) In comes Dilshan Madushanka to find that there's a slip and a leg slip. He survives, but it's just a matter of time. Liam Dawson's excellent spell now looks like this: 7-0-17-3.
26th over: Sri Lanka 119-8 (Malinga 4, Fernando 6) After being hit by Overton, Asitha Fernando gets his own back by hitting him for four. The ball is a full toss, the shot an agricultural clump.
25th over: Sri Lanka 113-8 (Malinga 3, Fernando 1) Dawson is celebrating again as Malinga is given LBW, playing outside the line and getting struck, as they say, amidships. But Malinga reviews and he's right to: HawkEye says the ball is going down the leg side.
Meanwhile, in Jo'burg, the Aussies are threatening to pull off a heist. Do join Daniel Gallan for that one.
24th over: Sri Lanka 112-8 (Malinga 2, Fernando 1) Out comes Asitha Fernando, who ducks into an 89mph bouncer, first ball, and is hit on the helmet. Thankfully it's only a glancing blow, but a physio goes through the protocols, asking him a few questions. I hope one of them is: "Can you hear the drums, Fernando?"
WICKET! Liyanage c Cox b Overton 19 (Sri Lanka 106-8)
Liyanage has been good, in the trickiest of circumstances, but now he too succumbs to the Sri Lankan virus, skyeritis. And again, it's too easy for Cox.
WICKET! Columbage st Cox b Dawson 4 (Sri Lanka 104-7)
The procession resumes! After playing second fiddle and not managing a tune, Sachindu Columbage throws caution to the wind and dances down the track to Dawson. He omits to connect with the ball and Jordan Cox's day to remember continues with a simple stumping.
22nd over: Sri Lanka 104-6 (Liyanage 18, Columbage 4) And here is JOverton, now that Root's ability to rush through an over is no longer required. He's a rather different proposition - twice the size and three times the speed. The batters are understandably wary, taking just a single apiece.
21st over: Sri Lanka 102-6 (Liyanage 17, Columbage 3) Another over from Liam Dawson, another three singles. Brook has already used six bowlers and still has Jamie Overton up his sleeve.
20th over: Sri Lanka 99-6 (Liyanage 15, Columbage 2) Signs of life! Janith Liyanage, facing Root, plays a lofted paddle for four and a drop-kick down the ground for six. Eleven off the over - but, more importantly, we've now had enough of a game for there to be a result. And England, surely, have got this one in the bag.
18th over: Sri Lanka 85-6 (Liyanage 2, Columbage 1) And now here comes Root again, in his capacity as England's fastest slow bowler. He enjoys it so much, he trots back to his mark after each ball. Someone needs to tell him how difficult this makes things for the live-blogging community.
WICKET! Wellalage c Baker b Dawson 5 (Ari Lanka 82-6)
And another! Wellalage swings for the hills but succeeds only in offering another simple catch off a top edge. Sonny Baker, at short fine leg, gathers it in safely.
16th over: Sri Lanka 78-5 (Wellalage 1, Liyanage 0) Root may have been summoned just to whizz through a few overs, as it's gloomy now and England have to bowl 20 overs for there to be a result.
WICKET! Asalanka c Overton b Root 7 (Sri Lanka 77-5)
After being caught in a trap, Sri Lanka are now having a mare. Brook surprises them by bringing on Root, who persuades Asalanka to chip to mid-on - where Jamie Overton takes a fine running catch, over his shoulder.
15th over: Sri Lanka 77-4 (Asalanka 7) Brook, always busy with his bowling changes, had replaced Jacks with Liam Dawson, who started strongly and perhaps had a hand in the panic that brought that kamikaze run.
WICKET! Rathnayake run out Archer 18 (Sri Lanka 77-4)
Sensational from Archer, who swoops at short third and hits the stumps so hard that one stump jumps out of the ground. It's out by miles - or is it? The replay shows that Cox dislodged the bail before the ball arrived. The big screen shows the big NOT OUT. But because the stump ended up out of the ground, it is out after all, and rightly so, as poor old Rathnayake was barely in the frame.
14th over: Sri Lanka 74-3 (Rathnayake 16, Asalanka 6) Archer continues and keeps the pressure on, conceding only three singles. So the rate creeps up - it's already nearly eight an over. The Sri Lankans are caught in a trap: they can't afford to take too many risks, but neither can they afford to take too few.
13th over: Sri Lanka 71-3 (Rathnayake 14, Asalanka 5) Has Rathnayake been strangled down the leg side? Jacks think so, Jordan Cox thinks so, and most importantly the umpire Wayne Knights thinks so too. But Rathnayake looks confident as he calls for a review and the third umpire is on his side, seeing nothing on Snicko. Still, it's been a good start for Jacks with his off-breaks: only five runs off his first two overs.
12th over: Sri Lanka 68-3 (Rathnayake 13, Asalanka 4) Just as the commentators are saying he hasn't been at his best lately, Jofra produces a snorter which raps Asalanka on the glove as it homes in on his right armpit. Only two off the over.
11th over: Sri Lanka 66-3 (Rathnayake 13, Asalanka 2) With the powerplay done, Brook turns to spin. It's Will Jacks, who got a five-for in the first game of this series. He starts solidly, going for three singles as Charith Asalanka plays himself in.
The cameras find a baby in the crowd, strapped to his (or her) mum's chest. The mum, seeing herself on the big screen, waves the baby's hand. It's a sell-out at the Oval today, which is good going in the embers of September.
10th over: Sri Lanka 63-3 (Rathnayake 12, Asalanka 0) Here is Jofra, replacing Baker, as recommended here - but he takes some tap! Rathanayake is lucky to pick up two off a thick edge, but there's nothing streaky about the consecutive fours he then unfurls - a whip off the pads and an upper cut.
9th over: Sri Lanka 53-3 (Rathnayake 2) It was another good over from Gus Atkinson, who kept Kusal quiet for a bit, saw him pick up a four with a miscued pull, then lured him into an instant replay. Kusal succumbs to the usual fate for top-order batters who have just kept wicket, getting off to a quick start but not staying long enough to offer more than a cameo. And poor old Sri Lanka are staring down the barrel.
WICKET! Kusal Mendis c Banton b Atkinson 35 (Sri Lanka 48-3)
Another one, and it's the big one! Kusal's counter-attack comes to an end as he mistimes a pull, sends it high in the air and presents Tom Banton, already having the best day of his life, with a simple catch.
8th over: Sri Lanka 48-2 (Kusal Mendis 31, Rathnayake 1) Brook disregards my advice for some reason, keeps Baker on and pays the price. Kusal plays a whip for six and a straight drive for four. This is more like the Baker we saw on his England debut, when he got battered by the South Africans. We all contain multitudes, fast bowlers perhaps more than most.
7th over: Sri Lanka 36-2 (Kusal Mendis 20, Rathnayake 0) After being clattered in his previous over, Atkinson bounced back with this one. He forced Kusal into a miscue that went for a jammy three and then beat Kamindu outside off with a fine out-seamer, which led to the desperate swish that was his downfall. So both the opening batters have gone and both the opening bowlers have a wicket - Atkinson one for 21, Baker one for 15.
WICKET! Kamindu Mendis c Duckett b Atkinson 12 (Sri Lanka 36-2)
Kamindu tries to swing Atkinson away for six and succeeds only in sending the ball up into the clouds. All Ben Duckett, at midwicket, has to do is stand there and wait for it to land in his cupped hands.
6th over: Sri Lanka 33-1 (Kamindu Mendis 12, Kusal Mendis 17) Just when everything was going so well for Sonny Baker, the ball stops swinging. Eoin Morgan wonders what he will do about this. The answer is: bowl line-and-length, go for a few singles, and then stray onto the pads pf the left-handed Kamindu, who clips him for four. Maybe time to give Jofra a go.
5th over: Sri Lanka 24-1 (Kamindu Mendis 6, Kusal Mendis 15) Sri Lanka could do with a counter-attack and here it is! Kusal, facing Atkinson, plays a pull for six, and likes it so much he does it again.
4th over: Sri Lanka 11-1 (Kamindu Mendis 5, Kusal Mendis 3) Another good over from Baker, though there's nothing to show for it as Kusal does well to dig out a yorker. Baker is always himself, with his bustling exuberance, but he's also unrecognisable from the rookie who made his Test debut on this ground in June - armed with a wider repertoire and the confidence to use it.
3rd over: Sri Lanka 6-1 (Kamindu Mendis 4, Kusal Mendis 0) After four dots from Atkinson, Kamindu decides it's time for the kitchen sink, lofts a fuller ball over the cover fielders and picks up four, even though he didn't middle it.
2nd over: Sri Lanka 2-1 (Kamindu Mendis 0, Kusal Mendis 0) That was Baker's second ball, and the first had been a peach too - also an outswinger, but fuller and beating the bat. A great start from him, a good punt from Brook, and a miserable day for Pathum Nissanka, who dropped Joe Root in the 10th over. Root didn't add many, but the fumble was still significant as it denied Sri Lanka the chance to get at Brook early on.
Harry Brook tosses the new ball to Sonny Baker, not Jofra Archer - and Baker produces some magic! This is a wicked outswinger, not just moving but lifting and taking the edge.
1st over: Sri Lanka 1-0 (Nissanka 1, Kamindu Mendis 0) Gus Atkinson takes the new ball on his home ground and finds some movement, drawing a thick inside edge from the right-handed Nissanka and jagging the ball away to beat the bat of the left-handed Mendis.
CricViz is already giving England an 85pc chance of a win. That seems a bit premature: about 30 years ago, Sri Lanka pioneered the fast start in this format.
Afternoon everyone and a big hand for Rob. He's the master of this quirky medium and has shown it again in the past 24 hours, informing and entertaining thousands of sports lovers across two England internationals in two very different ballgames. I don't know how he does it.
He has seen England's cricketers play better today than their football counterparts did last night. Sri Lanka are not Spain, of course, but they bowled so well early on that they made Joe Root look like a beginner. England were still struggling for the first part of Harry Brook's innings, but when he and Tom Banton changed gear, they went straight from second to fifth.
Banton had the best day of his career, making his first hundred for England, not fretting when his first few reverse sweeps misfired, eventually nailing that stroke along with several others, and breaking out into the broadest of smiles when he reached three figures. When he was out for 126, Jordan Cox, coming in as an understudy for Jos Buttler, played with such fearless verve that he made about as many runs as Brook at an even faster lick.
It was spectacular stuff and it leaves Sri Lanka with a mountain to climb if they're going to win the series.
That's all from me. Thanks for your company and emails, both today and throughout the English summer. The great Tim de Lisle will take you through Sri Lanka's runchase.
50th over: England 355-7 (Overton 21) England have done brilliantly to post 355 on a pitch offering plenty to spinners and seamers alike. The star was Tom Banton, who smashes a pulsating maiden century in international cricket. It was an innings of two halves from England: 108-2 in the first 25 overs, 247-5 in the second. Sri Lanka have two chances, and Slim doesn't do Sundays.
A low full toss from Fernando is lifted behind square for four by Cox, who has played a gem of an innings. It ends when he misses a premeditated scoop at the penulimate delivery and is bowled for 76 from 52 balls, but that's an apt way to end his breakthrough summer. England have found one.
49th over: England 348-5 (Cox 71, Overton 19) Cox follows a wide delivery from Malinga - it would have been a wide - and reverse scoops it over the keeper's head for four. The next ball is launched just short of Asalanka at deep midwicket, allowing him to steal two runs. He has 71 from 49 balls, including 40 from the last 18.
48th over: England 337-5 (Cox 62, Overton 17) Overton clips Fernando towards wide mid-on, where a lazy misfield from Asalanka turns two runs into four. The wheels are off now. A series of twos, a front-foot no-ball and a superb scoop for six from Cox allow England to take 20 from the over.
47th over: England 317-5 (Cox 56, Overton 4) Cox works Malinga for a single to reach an accomplished 42-ball fifty. Overton is dropped by Liyanage, a simple chance at long-on. Sri Lanka's catching has cost them today.
Cox muscles four more into the leg side to complete a good over for England. They're scored 209 in the last 22 overs.
46th over: England 307-5 (Cox 48, Overton 2) Cox drags a reverse sweep past the fielder at short third and away for four. He keeps strike with a single off the last ball, albeit after running into the abundant unit that is Jamie Overton. Cox is okay and needs two for his first ODI fifty.
45th over: England 298-5 (Cox 40, Overton 1) Back comes Eshan Malinga, whose reverse-swing was so important at Headingley. Cox lashes a low full toss for four, then canes another boundary through the covers. He continues to look the part at this level.
44th over: England 287-5 (Cox 30, Overton 0) That was the last ball of the over. Jamie Overton has come in at No7 ahead of Liam Dawson and Gus Atkinson.
43rd over: England 279-4 (Cox 24, Jacks 24) After getting his eye in for a few overs, Will Jacks has decided it's time to have some fun. He heaves Wellalage through mid-on for four, drives six over mid-off and edges another boundary to make it 16 from three balls.