More on that Zidane squad, with some quotes from the great man.
"What inspires me is the game. I want to see these players and this team playing."
On Jeremy Jacquet: "I like his profile a lot. I've followed him for a long time because he played alongside my son in the youth teams."
On Andy Diouf: "He plays in a different way for Inter. I want to see him playing left back."
On Esteban Lepaul: "He has a different profile from what we're used to seeing," Zidane said. "I like this kind of player who can play in tight spaces, he scores goals. I want to see him up close."
On Adrien Truffert of Bournemouth: "Choosing Andy and Truffert is a strong choice. They are capable of playing in this position."
On leaving out N'Golo Kante and Karim Benzema: "To help this team evolve. It's nothing to do with his quality, he's an extraordinary player, magnificent. But these are choices. N'Golo is 35 and I have made choices, which are different ... I adore Karim. But he's a certain age, a bit like N'Golo. "I need to see younger players and what we will do together."
Max Dowman, the acceptable face of teenage football development?
So, Max Dowman then. It has become quite hard to ignore him. He was brilliant against Ipswich in midweek, and brilliant in a way that seems solid and real and comfortable with itself. Most obviously there were the two goals, both a perfect snapshot of why Dowman seems equipped to survive, more state-of-the-art than some other young players we've burdened with expectation.
Tuchel was clear in saying the former Liverpool player had been called up as a right-back. Nor, though, has Alexander-Arnold made some great change in his natural position after a first season in which he played 30 of 56 Madrid games. Absent from the World Cup, Alexander-Arnold was one of eight players able to join Mourinho at the start of pre-season. That might have give him a head start, and the arrival of another coach offered him the chance of a new start too, but it has not worked out that way.
Some colour from Fabian Hurzeler, riding high with Brighton, who host Arsenal at 3pm UK time on Saturday:"Bart [Verbruggen] buys the coffee when he keeps a clean sheet. Before coming here I didn't drink coffee, it's becoming a daily habit. Mines an espresso macchiato."
The France squad has been announced, the first named by Zinedine Zidane. They face Turkey in Izmit on 25 September. France then travel to Belgium before hosting Italy and Belgium in October.
Some new faces: Goalkeeper Guillaume Restes, defenders Jeremy Jacquet and Andy Diouf, midfielder Lucas Da Cunha and forward Esteban Lepaul
Goalkeepers: Mike Maignan (Milan), Guillaume Restes (Toulouse), Robin Risser (Lens)
Defenders: Andy Diouf (Inter), Jeremy Jacquet (Liverpool), Pierre Kalulu (Juventus), Ibrahima Konate (Real Madrid), Jules Kounde (Barcelona), Maxence Lacroix (Chelsea), Adrien Truffert (Bournemouth), Dayot Upamecano (Bayern Munich)
Midfielders: Eduardo Camavinga (Real Madrid), Rayan Cherki (Manchester City), Lucas Da Cunha (Como), Manu Kone (Roma), Adrien Rabiot (Milan), Warren Zaire-Emery (Paris St Germain)
From the beginning, what drew me to On was the opportunity to build something entirely new together that will help shape tomorrow's game," said the France captain. "I want to bring my experience and perspective into what we create, push what's possible through innovation, and always stay true to the joy of football. We have a shared dream, and this is only the beginning.
Jacob Steinberg on the England squad announcement for that international break four-timer.
Hauling Trent Alexander-Arnold out of cold storage is an intriguing if slightly perplexing move. Why now? Does Tuchel actually trust the Real Madrid defender? Would Alexander-Arnold, who had not been selected since June 2025, be here if Spence, James or even Ben White were fit? The former Liverpool right-back has been in fitful form for José Mourinho's Madrid and has never established himself with England. For Alexander-Arnold the challenge is to make sure he remains in the picture in November. Tuchel, who does not intend to use the 27-year-old as a midfielder, told the newcomers that earning a call-up had to be followed by performing in an England shirt.
JJ Gabriel latest: the Press Association understands Manchester United will not accept Gabriel's request to be de-registered and have sought to persuade the youngster to stay, but there remains a risk that the 15-year-old could use a Fifa loophole to walk away when he turns 16 on October 6.
Gabriel would not be allowed to join another Premier League club if United do not cancel his registration, which runs until the summer, but as he qualifies for an EU passport via his Irish lineage there is a precedent that would allow him to sign for a European club after his birthday at the start of next month.
On Friday, there were reports Gabriel had arrived in Barcelona, having also been linked with Real Madrid, Paris St Germain and Bayern Munich.
Michael Carrick was asked: "I think he's a young boy, JJ, and I think it's important that we certainly don't play anything out here. I think the exposure and the scrutiny and everything, you've got to be careful and be sensible and think of him as much as anything, so the situation will work itself out, whatever way it's going to work itself out. Making sure he's okay is the important thing."
There's been a Ukrainian response to Russia's admission to the U-15 World Cup.
Matvii Bidnyi, Ukraine's minister of youth and sports said it "legitimised a terrorist state".
Bidnyi said, per the Press Association: "The international sports community must maintain unity and principled consistency, ruling out any concessions to the aggressor state.
"The Fifa football festival in Azerbaijan featuring the Russian under-15 national team with official national symbols - is nothing less than the legitimisation of a terrorist state, even if framed as an unofficial festival format. It is a direct attempt to provide Russians with a platform to display state symbols and spread Russian propaganda.
"While Russian youth are admitted to international football festivals, the aggressor state continues to commit crimes against Ukrainian children. According to Bring Kids Back UA, more than 20,000 cases of deportation and forced displacement of Ukrainian children by Russia have been verified, which underpins the ongoing International Criminal Court arrest warrant for Vladimir Putin. What 'equal opportunities' can we talk about when Russia has deprived our children of a normal childhood?
"We express our gratitude to Iceland and Germany for refusing to participate in this festival. We call on other national associations to join this decision and make a clear stand. FIFA's 2022 decision to suspend Russia from international competitions must remain inviolable across all levels - without any loopholes for unofficial tournaments."
Fifa's member federations should each get an extra $10 million from its swelling cash reserves after a successful World Cup, the soccer body's vice presidents from Europe and North America said in a letter Friday to its president Gianni Infantino as they step up efforts to oust him for trying to sell stakes in the tournament to private investors.
The letter says Fifa should have cash reserves of $6 billion after the World Cup and can afford such a "one-off release" - which would total $2.1 billion to the 211 federations - Uefa's president Aleksander Ceferin and Concacaf's leader Victor Montagliani tell Infantino in a letter seen by AP.
Carrick's midweek conqueror, Fabian Hurzeler, has been speaking about Brighton's form: "The players are in a good mood. They have a lot of confidence.
"They have a lot of belief in themselves. They build connections, especially when you have these long away trips. We really try to make them connect through games, through conversations, through discussions they have, and I think that's crucial that we can use this time very effectively because on the pitch in the end it will come back to these things - how strong are the relations, can they trust each other, can they rely on each other? So yes, it's positive."
More Carrick on his future: "In terms of the future and ownership and how long I've got, it's totally nothing. Thinking about it is ridiculous in the position I'm in. It's just not on the radar. We've got to perform and we've got a lot of games to plan for."
Michael Carrick shared some thoughts on his Manchester United future being questioned - already.
"History tells you that any team that's successful goes through periods when you have to work through it, come through it and improve. We've had a small period, in recent time, when it hasn't been exactly what we want it to be.
"I was expecting a point when we would go through it, it was going to come. We had such a good spell last season, going into this season.
"It is a week or two, the games haven't gone our way. It's tiny margins in some of those games. We will work through it. Winning games is always the answer, it can cover up a lot of things at times as well. Sometimes it's the small disappointments that lead to something a bit bigger. It's part of coping and being at this great football club."
There are reports that JJ Gabriel, Manchester United's enfant terrible, is in Barcelona for talks. Confirmation needed but that looks the end of his time in Manchester.
Leeds have had a fine start to the season, though Daniel Farke, who a year ago was under pressure, is keeping feet on the ground. ""It's not a coincidence anymore. It's not just a good period, it's quality what we are delivering and everyone can be proud of this and take lots of confidence.
"But, in this league nothing is guaranteed. The momentum can change very quickly. If we think we can be big time, it is the first step to failure. We won't be succesful at all. The table at the moment is not important. What is important is we are on eight points - this is quite good. But not good enough to achieve what we want to achieve.
This game will be broadcast on ITV, terrestrial TV in the UK, on Saturday. What could possibly go wrong?
There is nothing to glorify here. This will be the 100th competitive meeting, if discontinued,minor tournaments are included, and anyone failing to see the logic behind the rivalry can be forgiven. The sides are not on each other's doorstep and Millwall are south of the Thames, meaning Crystal Palace and Charlton are more obvious enemies. Yet it is not really about football. The tribalism runs deep, dating back to when the clubs were formed by rival shipbuilding firms at docks on the Isle of Dogs in east London, and is more down to hooligan elements than anything that happens on the pitch.
Roberto De Zerbi will be glad to hear he has the backing of Unai Emery, whose Aston Villa team play Tottenham on Sunday. "De Zerbi is a fantastic manager. He played fantastic football here and performed fantastic here in Brighton. He did a fantastic job before as well in Italy and Marseille. They are getting better. They compete fantastic, even losing against Liverpool.
"Facing them is a difficult match. Of course, being very demanding defensively for us. Tottenham, I expect them to be in the top four."
First, David Moyes on Jarrad Branthwaite's deserved callup to the England squad. Scored a fine goal at Bournemouth the other week. "I'm really pleased for anybody who gets selected for their country. Jarrad even more so because of the injuries that he's had but I was hearing that he's only got one England cap and it was only 25 or 27 minutes or something. I hope he doesn't play four games that's for sure."
We've still got a good number of Premier League press conferences to come this afternoon. As well as Arbeloa, Daniel Farke, Pierre Sage and others have been facing the media glare in the past hour or so.
And here to guide you through it all is the venerable Mr John Brewin.
Fulham head coach Alvaro Arbeloa has been asked about Michael Carrick being under pressure ahead of his side's clash with Manchester United.
Every Premier League manager is under pressure, it's the same for every manager. It's not because what comes from outside it's because you have to be really demanding from yourself.
All the managers, we want to win every weekend and for sure when you are a coach of a big team you are always under pressure, but it's the same for me because I need to win games.
Carrick hit back at journalists today by claiming the suggestion his job was under threat was "ridiculous".
On United's indifferent start to the season, he said: "It's not a catastrophe, it's not a disaster, it's not the end of the world." He said he "expected" there would be a spell when results became patchy, after guiding United to 12 wins in 17 games during the second half of last season.
"We've got to put things in perspective. We're not in a place where we have gone on an awful long run of horrific results."
Shaw and Baleba could feature for Man Utd against Fulham
Michael Carrick has revealed Luke Shaw could return from injury to play for Manchester United in their game at Fulham on Sunday, while summer signing Carlos Baleba could make his club debut.
Both players have been managing slight fitness issues in recent weeks, with Shaw missing the Manchester derby and the defeat to Brighton. Baleba was a £65m arrival from the Seagulls towards the end of the summer window.
Carrick said "there is a chance" both players play some part against Fulham. "Not totally 100% but there is a chance," he said.
"It is really short-term to be honest but it is just working towards the game so we will see how he is coming up to the weekend."
United otherwise have a clean bill of health going into the visit to Craven Cottage, which is being dubbed a must-win for the under-fire Carrick.
Oxford United have abandoned a new range of American style-sportswear after it inadvertently referenced the tragedy of September 11.
The League One club launched its new 'Campus Collection' on Friday morning and had removed it from sale by lunchtime, after clothing designs were revealed to bear the slogan 'United 93'. The U's immediately published an apology that admitted to a lack of understanding of "the historical context and associations" related to the branding and made "sincere apologies for this error and any offence caused."
"Inspired by the style and culture of American sports", the Campus Collection was originally trailed for launch by the club on 11 September of this year, the 25th anniversary of the atrocity that killed nearly 3,000 people. Concerns over sensitivity saw the launch then delayed, but when the online collection was finally made available for sale on Friday, images showed models wearing an NFL-style shirt with 'United 93' on the chest, in recognition of Oxford being founded in 1893.
United 93 was one of four domestic passenger jets seized by al-Qaida terrorists on 11 September 2001. A mutiny by passengers prevented hijackers from using the plane to destroy a government building in Washington DC, and it ultimately crashed into a field, killing all 44 people on board. A film titled 'United 93' was also made about the tragedy.
We've had loads of emails today about the England squad and Thomas Tuchel's position and future in charge of the national team.
Rick Parfett is the latest to weigh in on fan feeling towards the German after the World Cup semi-final exit:
The atmosphere of blame and anger around Tuchel feels reflective of wider societal dynamics - a conversation lacking in nuance, an inability to appreciate positive aspects, and a reflexive default to anger and frustration. The causes are complex, among others: stagnating living standards, social media financially rewarding outrage, and newspapers constantly needing a story.
But it doesn't feel reflective of reality and it's deeply tiresome to see it take over our national psyche. Tuchel brought clarity to his selections - no more crowbarring three number 10s into the team alongside Kane - and some really joyful moments. One mistake shouldn't be allowed to erase that, in my opinion.
I think that's a very measured email, Rick, with some good points. In my view, however, Tuchel should be not be completely absolved of blame for his in-game management of the Argentina game, especially late on.
Iraola has also backed Bradley Barcola to come good sooner rather than later, with all the pressure on the £125m signing to produce for Liverpool this season.
He added: "With Bradley, the more time he plays, the better he will become. He's come in straight away, without pre-season minutes, but in a good shape. Like all the signings coming from other leagues, he will need some time to adjust to the Premier League. But he's very used to playing high-level games and I see him in a good place, yes."
Andoni Iraola is speaking to the press now. The Liverpool boss returns to his old stomping ground of Bournemouth on Sunday, and was particularly pleased to see Alex Scott, his former player, as well as Liverpool youngster Rio Ngumoha named in the England squad this morning.
"Very happy for both [players]," he said. "They both absolutely deserve it. They also went to help the national team before the tournament and I'm sure they did a good job. I can only speak well about both. Very deserved, very ready. And I hope they both enjoy it."
Surely De Zerbi can get some kind of tune from Spurs's attacking players. When Kulusevski comes back, and assuming all can stay fit, these will be the forward-thinking players at his disposal:
Dejan Kulusevski
James Maddison
Savio
Omar Marmoush
Mathys Tel
Mohammed Kudus
Xavi Simons
Dominic Solanke
Wilson Odobert
Mykhailo Mudryk
That's not including Matheus Fernandes, who is classed as more of a midfielder, or Richarlison, who has been left out of Tottenham's Premier League squad altogether this season. It's still 10 players for a maximum of four positions. Is it simply a case of having too many options and not knowing your best attack?
The Mudryk and Savio signings in the summer were particularly puzzling, given their limited returns in the Premier League previously.
Here's what Roberto De Zerbi said when quizzed about Tottenham's struggles so far this season, despite a bumper transfer spend of around £300m in the summer.
We still need to improve in all areas really. I have enough experience as a manager to understand that you have to stay calm and have confidence in what you're doing. The players have my full confidence. We move on and we keep trying to be better day by day - not by words but by facts.
We have to accept it - nothing more. I would work every day if I could, but if we have to stop then we have to stop. The most important thing right now is our game against Aston Villa. It will be a tough game but we have the quality and the players to play well. If we don't play well, we won't win against them. Let's hope for a good performance.
De Zerbi also revealed Pedro Porro, Sandro Tonali and James Maddison are all available to face Villa tomorrow lunchtime (12.30pm KO BST), while Dejan Kulusevski is back in training after a long layoff, since May 2025, with a knee injury.
Press conferences: We've got Michael Carrick of Manchester United and Liverpool's Andoni Iraola due to speak to the media shortly.
But first ... let's hear from Roberto De Zerbi next. Lots of questions for him to answer, most pertinently on how Spurs go about trying to win a game of football.
Manchester City have room to improve, says Maresca
Jamie Jackson
Manchester City's 5-0 Carabao Cup victory against Norwich on Thursday was a sixth win from their opening six competitive games, yet Enzo Maresca is sure his team can be far better - possibly by 50%.
"Always room to improve," the manager said. "[Now] we can prepare for Sunderland [on Sunday] - this is the only thing that I have in my mind. Then if we have 40% or 50% [to improve] I don't know."
Erling Haaland, Enzo Fernández, Marc Guéhi, Gianluigi Donnarumma, Josko Gvardiol and Antoine Semenyo were rested for Norwich's visit, with a view to freshening them for Sunderland.
Maresca said: "It was very important. We gave rest to the ones that played back-to-back 90 minutes against Porto and United. Hopefully they can be full of energy for Sunday's game - that will be a strong [difficult] game."
Ronaldo included in Portugal's squad for Nations League
Cristiano Ronaldo has been included in Portugal's squad by new coach Jorge Jesus for their upcoming Nations League games.
The 41-year-old Ronaldo said that this summer's World Cup was his last, but the superstar striker has yet to say when he plans to retire from international play. He will be 43 by the time the 2028 European Championship, the next major tournament, is held.
This was the first squad named by Jesus, who was hired to replace Spaniard Roberto Martinez after Portugal lost 1-0 to Spain in the World Cup last 16. Jesus' previous coaching job was with Ronaldo's club Al-Nassr in Saudi Arabia, where they won the league together last season.
Regarding Ronaldo's role, Jesus said "all the called-up players are at my disposal."
"If he performs well, he plays. If he doesn't perform well, he doesn't play. That's how I treat everyone," Jesus said.
"Now, does Cris have a different status? Yes. His career is different. He has five Ballon d'Or awards. But does that influence my decisions? No. It doesn't influence anything, zero, but he is different from the others." AP
New Belgium coach Mark van Bommel was told his son Ruben had earned a first Netherlands call-up while holding a press conference on Friday to announce his own maiden squad.
On a busy day for the Van Bommel household, PSV winger Ruben van Bommel was included in new Netherlands coach Xavi's first squad for Nations League matches later this month.
The Dutch announcement was issued at noon, just as the elder Van Bommel began unveiling his Belgium squad in Tubize. After explaining his selections, he was asked by reporters about his son's call-up.
"Is the squad already known?" Van Bommel replied. "Do you think I already knew? I'm very proud of him, just as every father would be very proud of his son when he is called up for the Dutch national team. I played for the national team myself. That is the highest level you can achieve."
Van Bommel said the call-up was particularly significant after his son's recovery from a cruciate ligament injury. "It has been a difficult year for him," he said. "To come back in that way is a great achievement by him."
The 22-year-old has made a strong start to the season at Dutch champions PSV and becomes the third generation of his family to be involved with the Dutch team. His grandfather Bert van Marwijk, 74, coached the Netherlands to the 2010 World Cup final and his father Mark, 49, won 79 caps and captained the national team. Mark also played in the 2010 final, which the Netherlands lost to Spain in Johannesburg.
Van Bommel's first game in charge of Belgium is away against Italy in Rome on September 25, a day after the Dutch play their first game of the new Nations League campaign against Germany in Amsterdam. Reuters
Let's pivot to some Premier League press conferences. Brighton boss Fabian Hürzeler has seen his team begin the season impressively and reserved special praise for Pascal Gross, who is thriving in his second spell with the Seagulls, now at the age of 35. He loves scoring against Manchester United in particular.
With Brighton locking horns with in-form Arsenal tomorrow, Hürzeler said of his veteran German: "We have to be aware that Martin Ødegaard can create that many chances, that will be so important. Hopefully we can bring Pascal Gross into the kind of positions where he can be make such an impact on our game.
"I'm pleased with how he is performing at the moment, not only in possession but also out of possession. It is nice to see how he is leading on and off the pitch. It is a joy to watch him play at the moment, hopefully he can carry on like this."
My two-penneth on the Nations League is that it's far better than the drudgery of international friendlies, and I actually think one longer international break is better than the more disruptive multiple autumn breaks. Maybe people will get into international football over the next couple of weeks, who knows?
Some emails have come in regarding the nature of the Nations League and Gareth Southgate.
Krishna Moorthy writes:
Does anyone even follow Nations League? I have still not understood the format of this tournament. This is probably the European equivalent of a Carabao cup.
Russia to return to Fifa competition in boys' Under-15 World Cup
Russia are poised to compete in a Fifa event for the first time since the 2022 invasion of Ukraine.
The country was listed on Friday among the entrants for the boys' Under-15 World Cup and Festival which is being hosted in Azerbaijan next month.
Russian national teams and club sides were banned from Fifa and Uefa competitions in the wake of the invasion. Though Fifa lifted the ban on Russia's under-17s in 2023, this under-15 tournament marks the first time they will have actually played. Russia have been drawn in a group alongside Turkey, as well as Afghanistan, Djibouti, Sierra Leone and Sudan.
The FIFA U-15 World Cup & Festival is a new festival-style competitions for boys (2026), girls (2027) and both (2028 onwards) be open to all 211 Fifa Member Associations, regardless of size or footballing tradition. To align with the development needs of U-15 players, the matches are shorter in duration, played on smaller pitches, with teams comprising - for the 2026 edition at least - eight players.
The Fifa council agreed last December that the under-15 event would be open to teams from all of its 211 member associations. In July, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) dropped its recommendation for global sports federations like Fifa to ban Russia.
In February, the Fifa president, Gianni Infantino, told Sky News the Russia ban had "not achieved anything" and had just created "more frustration and hatred".
Ukraine's sports minister Matvii Bidnyi described Infantino's remarks as "irresponsible" and "infantile". He said: "They detach football from the reality in which children are being killed." Press Association
The Netherlands' record scorer Memphis Depay was left out, but the captain Virgil van Dijk continues his international career as new coach Xavi Hernandez named his first squad on Friday for the upcoming Nations League matches.
Depay played only as a substitute at the World Cup earlier this year and remained on a national-record of 55 goals. The 32-year-old striker is expected to retire after 112 national team appearances. Van Dijk said last month that he would consider his international future after speaking to the new coach but has decided to hold off on hanging up his boots.
The Netherlands face Germany, Greece and Serbia twice in four Nations League matches during the extended three-week international window.
Xavi handed a first call-up to Ruben van Bommel and Gjivai Zechiel and brought back the midfielder Joey Veerman but must do without talisman Frenkie de Jong, who is still suffering from a knee injury sustained at the World Cup. Marten de Roon and Wout Weghorst are also not included in the 26-man squad, along with Guus Til and the injured Brighton midfielder Mats Wieffer. Jeremie Frimpong, Kenneth Taylor and Jurrien Timber, who missed the World Cup, return to the squad.
Full squad:
Goalkeepers: Mark Flekken (Bayer Leverkusen), Robin Roefs (Sunderland), Bart Verbruggen (Brighton).
Defenders: Nathan Ake (Fenerbahce), Denzel Dumfries (Real Madrid), Jeremie Frimpong (Liverpool), Lutsharel Geertruida (PSV Eindhoven), Jorrel Hato (Chelsea), Jurrien Timber (Arsenal), Micky van de Ven (Tottenham Hotspur), Virgil van Dijk (Liverpool), Jan Paul van Hecke (Tottenham Hotspur).
Spurs are bad. I know that, you know that. But why? They are getting into attacking areas but are failing to make or take chances. Our data visual journalist Andrew Beasley breaks it down.
Several metrics illustrate their attacking problems. Spurs are capable of getting the ball into dangerous areas, before the next step trips them up.
Their total of 46 completed take-ons leads the Premier League. Only five of these successful dribbles ended with the player creating a chance or taking a shot though. Manchester United have completed 17 fewer take-ons than Tottenham yet have produced tangible output with almost twice as many (nine) chances or shots.
It is similar for high turnovers, which occur when the ball is recovered within 40 metres of the opposition goal to begin a new possession sequence. Spurs have recorded the fourth-most in 2026-27 (34), but only Coventry (one) have ended fewer of them with a shot (two). Tottenham have produced a goal attempt from 5.9% of their high turnovers when the league average is 19.9%. Nothing is flowing smoothly.
Gianni Infantino must leave the Fifa presidency "no ifs or buts", according to Hans-Joachim Watzke, one of the vice-presidents of the German Football Association (DFB), as he spoke at a festival dedicated to artificial intelligence in Berlin on Thursday.
The DFB was one of the few federations not to sign a letter of support for Infantino's re-election as Fifa president in six months' time. "He has to go, no ifs or buts," said Watzke, who said that three points in particular counted against the Swiss.
The first was the Fifa Peace Prize, launched by Infantino and awarded in December 2025 to the US president, Donald Trump, to whom Infantino is close, during the draw for the 2026 World Cup. Infantino "created this prize himself, and he decided on it himself," said Watzke. "You can't just invent something on your own and then announce it, it's madness," said Watzke.
Watzke also condemned the controversial handling of the Folarin Balogun red card during this year's World Cup which was hosted in the US, Canada and Mexico. The American forward was sent off in the last 32 but his automatic one-match suspension was lifted after a phone call from Trump to Infantino. "It can't be that when someone gets sent off, the head of state calls the Fifa president, and, remarkably, the whole thing is immediately overturned. That's madness," said Watzke.
The third issue was the project, unveiled on 28 July and dropped four days later, to create a commercial company that would have been open to private investors and became a focal point of the rebellion against Infantino. "It's completely insane," said Watzke. "Nobody knew about it, his vice-presidents in Fifa knew nothing, the [Fifa] council knew nothing."
The DFB president Bernd Neuendorf said earlier in the week that it was also time for Infantino to depart. "The relationship of trust with Gianni Infantino, under this FIFA leadership, has of course been completely shattered," he said in an interview with RTL/ntv television. "It's important that this Infantino system comes to an end."
For now, Infantino is the only candidate for the FIFA presidency in the election scheduled for 18 March 2027, with candidacies open until 18 November.
This time tomorrow we will be 8 minutes away from kick-off at The Den where West Ham and Millwall will renew their rivalry. The Metropolitan police have been granted special powers to tackle violence as the south and east London teams meet again for the first time in 14 years.
There is nothing to glorify here. This will be the 100th competitive meeting, if discontinued, minor tournaments are included, and anyone failing to see the logic behind the rivalry can be forgiven. The sides are not on each other's doorstep and Millwall are south of the Thames, meaning Crystal Palace and Charlton are more obvious enemies. Yet it is not really about football. The tribalism runs deep, dating back to when the clubs were formed by rival shipbuilding firms at docks on the Isle of Dogs in east London, and is more down to hooligan elements than anything that happens on the pitch.
There have been many occasions when the nastiness has spiralled out of control. Hooliganism was rife in English football during the 1970s and 1980s and Millwall and West Ham had fearsome firms. Trouble erupted when the sides met at the Den for a testimonial for the Millwall defender Harry Cripps in 1972. The toxicity grew and a Millwall fan, Ian Pratt, died after a clash with West Ham fans at New Cross station in 1976. It is worth keeping in mind when people try to hype up this fixture. Stories about who was top dog on the terraces back in the day are not that interesting.
The new Belgium coach Mark van Bommel on named his first squad for their four Nations League matches, retaining the core of the World Cup selection.
Van Bommel, who has replaced Rudi Garcia, added eight players who did not take part in the tournament in Canada, Mexico and the US as he named a 28-man squad for matches against Italy, France (twice), and Turkey between 25 September and 5 October.
Belgium must do without first-choice goalkeeper Thibaut Courtois, who asked to be excused from the Nations League campaign to regulate his playing time at the age of 34. Jérémy Doku, who was seen as a key player for the World Cup campaign but had a disappointing tournament, misses out due to injury, as does Amadou Onana.
Attacker Alexis Saelemaekers and veteran defender Thomas Meunier have been dropped while Axel Witsel has retired from international football. The uncapped players in the squad include goalkeepers Jari De Busser, Mike Penders and Maarten Vandevoordt and the 21-year-old full-back Kyriani Sabbe.
At the World Cup, Belgium reached the quarter-finals, being eliminated after a 2-1 defeat to eventual champions Spain.Belgium were ultimately the only team to score a goal against Spain throughout the latter's victorious World Cup campaign.
Full squad:
Goalkeepers: Jari De Busser (AZ Alkmaar), Senne Lammens (Manchester United), Mike Penders (Chelsea), Maarten Vandevoordt (RB Leipzig).