Some calm has returned to markets today, after recent turbulence in the bond markets.
UK government debt has recovered some of its recent losses, which has pushed down borrowing costs. The yield, or rate of return, on UK 10-year debt is now down 10 basis points (0.1 of a percentage point) at 5.13%, away from the 18-year high set yesterday.
US central banker ChristopherWaller helped to calm investors' worries by saying he is leaning towards holding US interest rates unchanged at this month's meeting.
However, the Bank of England's chief economist, HuwPill, is pushing for a rise in UK borrowing costs.
Mortgages are already expected to rise, due to the recent jump in UK bond yields.
AJ Bell head of financial analysis Danni Hewson sums up the day:
"It's been a brighter day for global markets as bond yields stabilised and comments from Federal Reserve governor Christopher Waller took some heat out of rate hike expectations.
"Whilst the price of Brent crude jumped to nearly to $97 a barrel as tensions in the Middle East continue to simmer, Mr Waller saying he could argue in favour of keeping the US base rate at its current level to give prices a chance to cool off helped lift market sentiment. A slightly higher than expected unemployment count added more weight to the scale, but August's inflation data will be the ultimate test next week.
Back in the financial markets, bitcoin has hit a four-month high.
The crypto asset has jumped back over the $80,000 mark to trade as high as $81,383 this afternoon.
Simon Peters, crypto analyst at etoro, explains why:
Recent moves from the US Treasury - that it will double the size of its long-dated bond buybacks and a willingness to use the General Account to support the long end of the bond market - has brought liquidity back into focus, and in turn renewed interest in bitcoin, as historically it has been a key beneficiary of increased market liquidity.
Attention also remains on the Federal Reserve, which controls short-term interest rates. While inflation remains above target, any signs of a meaningful cooling of inflation over the coming months could provide a further tailwind for bitcoin by increasing the prospect of a more accommodative monetary policy.
Going into the last months of 2026, seasonality could also play a role. The fourth quarter has historically been bitcoin's strongest performing quarter of the year.
In his speech, HuwPill also argues that the Bank cannot sit on its hands just because the financial markets have tightened financial conditions because they expect rate hikes.
That tightening (the City expects three rate hikes by the end of next year) has, arguably, done some of the Bank's job for it.
Pill, though, explains that this situation could backfire though:
While we can continue for a while under the assumption that markets 'have done our job for us' by repricing the short-end following the energy price shock, when those market expectations depart from an unchanged path for Bank Rate (as they do at the time of writing), at some point we will unavoidably face the choice of validating the forward rate curve (by hiking Bank Rate) or acquiescing in the curve shifting downward (by continuing to hold Bank Rate).
There is no free lunch. And the danger exists that the market may lose confidence that expected Bank Rate increases will be implemented just at the time as it starts to entertain doubts that the MPC ability or willingness to bring inflation down to target. Indeed, one would expect that to be the case. So, there is potential 'wrong-way risk' here: in this setting, the market will ease financial conditions just when the MPC needs them to tighten.
The Bank of England's chief economist is to renew his push for an increase in UK interest rates today.
HuwPill will tell the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce that "clear, prompt and decisive policy action and communication" would help to avoid the danger that inflationary pressures from the Iran war become embedded and persistent.
Pill, who was part of the minority of policymakers who voted for a rate rise in July, argues that "acting clearly, promptly and decisively with Bank Rate" would be effective at dampening down inflation pressures.
Pill will say:
At a time of profound uncertainty, it is important that the MPC offers an anchor for the short end of the market curve, rather than gives the impression that it is chasing market expectations. As reflected in my vote in recent policy rounds, I see benefit in acting clearly, promptly and decisively with Bank Rate.
This would cut through the noise inherent in the current uncertain environment in a way that bolsters the clarity and effectiveness of our policy choices.
Key components for UK's first small nuclear reactor to be built in Newcastle
Siemens Energy's Newcastle site has won an important contract in the energy world today - to make steam turbine components for Rolls-Royce SMR's first three small modular reactors.
Those SMRs are being built on Anglesey in North Wales, and Siemens Energy is to become the first company to manufacture components - including high-pressure turbines and valve casings - for a small modular reactor anywhere in Europe.
MiattaFahnbulleh, secretary of state for energy security and net zero, says:
This is what our golden age of nuclear looks like in practice: skilled jobs in Newcastle, stronger British manufacturing and a more secure energy future.
Producing these components here in the UK will help strengthen our energy security, reduce our exposure to volatile international gas markets, create new export opportunities for British industry, and reindustrialise the UK.
Back in April, Rolls-Royce secured up to £599m from Britain's national wealth fund to help it in the race to develop the UK's first small modular nuclear reactors at Wylfa, Anglesey.
Fed's Waller indicates he will support holding rates steady at September meeting
Federal Reserve governor Christopher Waller has said today he is leaning toward keeping interest rates steady at the central bank's September meeting, provided there are no surprises from upcoming inflation data.
In an interview with Reuters, Waller expressed confidence in the current inflation trends - just days after Fed chair KevinWarsh argued that there could be 'work to do' to tackle inflation.
Waller said:
I'm going to paraphrase John Lennon here. Give disinflation a chance.
I'm not going to say let's wait until next year, but let's just wait and see if we get some improvement on this."
These comments seem to be pushing the dollar down, adding to the yen's rise today - Japan's currency has now gained almost 2% today.
Nvidia's acquisition of Hugging Face is another sign (see earlier post) that the company's ambitions extend far beyond selling chips.
Axel Rudolph, chief technical analyst at investing and trading platform IG, explains:
By bringing one of the key platforms for open-source and open-weight AI models into its ecosystem, Nvidia gains a much deeper relationship with developers and a new route into the software and deployment layers of AI.
The deal could help sustain demand for Nvidia hardware while reducing its reliance on a handful of hyperscalers, but there is a clear risk that Hugging Face's appeal as a neutral platform could be weakened if developers fear Nvidia is taking too much control. The price tag looks hefty on conventional measures, but Nvidia is clearly buying strategic influence as much as current earnings. And despite the scale of the deal, there still looks to be plenty of mileage left in the Nvidia share price: the company is expanding into more parts of the AI ecosystem, while its valuation does not look excessive when viewed against its longer-term growth prospects."
Newsflash: Nvidia has agreed to buy AI model platform Hugging Face for $13bn.
Hugging Face is a database of AI models, which recently hit the headlines after being hacked by a rogue group of OpenAI's agents.
Announcing the deal, Nvidia's CEO Jensen Huang says Hugging Face is "a vibrant home for the open model developer community".
Huang says that the deal will speed up the spread of open models, and pledges to help scale up Hugging Face's platform, strengthen its infrastructure and expand access to AI for developers and institutions.
Huang explains:
More than 18 million developers, researchers and creators use Hugging Face to share more than 3m models, 500,000 datasets and 1m applications. More than 200,000 companies use the platform to discover, evaluate, customize and deploy AI.
Hugging Face will remain an open platform for the entire AI ecosystem. Developers will choose the models they want, the frameworks they want, the clouds and inference service providers they want and the computing platforms they want. Nvidia compute will not be required to build on or deploy through Hugging Face.
UK government bonds are continuing to rally, pushing down borrowing costs.
With prices rising, the yield on 10-year gilts is now down over 6 basis points (0.06 of a percentage point) to 5.176%. That wipes out all Wednesday's rise, and some of Tuesday's too.
Oil has shaken off its earlier losses, and is pushing higher as traders fret about the Middle East conflict.
Israeli defense minister IsraelKatz has warned that if Iran attacks Israel, the military will target all of the regime's infrastructure, "including energy infrastructure."
Speaking at a Jewish New Year toast with Defense Ministry employees, Katz said:
There are signs we are seeing that indicate that the heavy economic pressure Iran is under and the fear of an uprising and the fall of the regime could push them to desperate measures.
An Iranian attack on Israel will free us from all constraints. We will strike all infrastructure - including energy infrastructure - and return Iran to the Stone Age and darkness.
Joe Maher, markets economist at CapitalEconomics, has predicted that UK government bonds will recover over the coming months, pushing down yields.
He told clients:
Higher energy prices alongside renewed fiscal concerns have pushed Gilt yields to multi-decade highs, but we continue to think they will fall back over the next year or so.
Over in the US, the pace of job cuts have slowed despite firms using AI to cut their workforces.
Coaching company Challenger, Gray & Christmas have calculated that US-based employers announced 33,429 job cuts in July, down 27% compared with June, and nearly half as many as in July 2025.
It's the lowest monthly total in two years.
AndyChallenger, workplace expert and chief revenue officer for Challenger, Gray & Christmas, explains:
"The pace of layoffs fell dramatically this summer. Layoff plans continue to be announced primarily in Tech, and artificial intelligence is still the story, as investments in the technology reshape organizations.
"Hiring has also increased over last year by 25%, so while AI is shifting the labor market, it is not dismantling it.
But....
Technology companies announced 9,867 job cuts in July, taking the total so far this year up to 149,023.
Challenger says:
"Tech remains the center of gravity for this year's cuts, and AI is still the reason companies give."
Upmarket cinema chain Everyman saw revenues surge by a quarter and admissions rise by a fifth in the first half of the year, as blockbusters including the Michael Jackson music biopic and The Devil Wears Prada sequel saw box office sales top £600m in the UK & Ireland for the first time since before the pandemic.
Everyman, which is in the process of being taken private by its biggest shareholders after the business struggled last year, reported a 23.5% increase in revenues to £69.8m in the half year to 02 July.
Everyman, which has halted new site openings this year as the business refocuses under new chief executive FarahGolant, said that admissions rose 20.5% year-on-year to 2.6m.
The cinema-going recovery, fuelled by box office hits including the latest SuperMario movie, Ryan Gosling's Project Hail Mary and Toy Story 5, helped Everyman bounce back to a £1.9m pre-tax profit. The company reported a £3.4m loss in the same period last year.
The strong performance meant that the company was able to reduce net debt to £17.4m, from £24.2m a year ago.
Everyman, which is opening three new venues next year, said that it increased its share of the UK market from 5.8% to 6.4% and that its membership programme increased 13.4% to 75,788.
"We have momentum and strong focus to manage the business with discipline and prudent investment," said Golant.
The company said that it expects its financial performance this year to be "marginally ahead" of 2025, with TheOdyssey and Spider-man: Brand New Day proving to be summer blockbusters, and a strong slate to round out the year including the latest releases in the HungerGames, Avengers and Dune franchises.
In another sign that market tensions are easing, the yen is rallying against the US dollar.
The Japanese currency has gained 1.4% so far today, to ¥156.5/$, adding to a 0.9% rally yesterday.
That taken the yen/$ exchange rate away from the 160 level that tends to make policymakers jumpy.
Last month, the yan rallied thanks to a joint intervention by Washington and Tokyo. This time, though, investors are attributing the move to increased expectations of a rate hike by the Bank of Japan.
Bank of Japan (BOJ) board member HajimeTakata can take the credit, after saying yesterday the central bank should conduct interest rate hikes nimbly to counter intensifying inflationary pressures, rather than sticking to the fixed semiannual pace anticipated by markets.
Interestingly, Japan's top currency diplomat AtsushiMimura has said that financial authorities remain on alert over currency market developments, adding: