Noah Caluori is addressing the dangers of second-season syndrome as he sets about charting a path to England's World Cup squad next year and it soon becomes apparent he has one clear advantage. Twelve months ago he was an unknown quantity, now opponents will see him coming, but Caluori is hoping playing without pain can ensure he soars to new heights.
What made the 19-year-old's stratospheric rise last season all the more impressive was that he played with a debilitating wrist injury for much of it. That he still ended his first Prem season as joint top try-scorer and won his first two England caps over the summer demonstrates a resilience in someone who has made things look so easy in his short career.
Caluori sustained the injury in December, ripping two ligaments off the bone in his right hand, but after discussing his chances of making England's squad for July's Nations Championship fixtures he opted to play through the pain barrier. He has since had surgery and will miss the start of the season but will be back to find his form before England reconvene for their four November Tests at Twickenham.
"During the Six Nations I got a scan on it and it showed I needed surgery," he says. "They were, like: 'You can have surgery now' - I'd torn two bones completely off my scaphoid and lunate ... the ligament off those two bones in my hand - 'so you can even have surgery now, which is going to take you out until the last game of the Prem. Or you can fight through it and then just deal with the pain until the end of the season'.
"I sat down and spoke to the England coaches and Saracens coaches and I came to the conclusion I'm going to push for this, I'm going to hope I end up going on tour, I'm going to try the best I can for Saracens, try and help us get to the playoffs. I'm pretty happy with the decision I made, because I'm back pretty soon. They had to take a strip off my tendon through my forearm, drill a hole through my scaphoid and connect it all back up. There's a bit of a grim video, but part of surgery, part of the job.
"It would just hurt, a lot of movements hurt, I had to modify a lot of my gym plans, catching the high balls hurt. I learned how to manage the pain. Saracens and England gave me enough freedom, because if it was too bad and I wasn't able to play, they would have not let me play. I chose what I wanted to do and then you've just got to live with your decision. I was pretty happy that I've done it. I've got no regrets. It's part of the job that I signed up for, isn't it?"
When Caluori makes his comeback it will be under the stewardship of Brendan Venter, who has returned to the club to take the reins after Mark McCall stepped aside, ending his 15-year tenure at Saracens. He will be a marked man but, revealing how Bath had sought to stymie his remarkable aerial ability last season, Caluori believes that he can remain head and shoulders above his wing rivals this term.
"I've had multiple chats with people and it's just similar things: you have the ability to do it, it just matters about your mentality, because they've seen loads of players, similar to what I've done, drop off in two or three years because they got complacent," he says. "I don't think I'm that type of person, I'm very hungry for everything I've seen other people do.
"As much as [opponents are] working to try and defend me, I'm working on how to make my abilities harder for them until I hopefully get to a point where they can't defend it. I see ways that people last year in the Prem, when I came up against them for the first time, for example against Bath, when they checked me before I could go up. A couple of weeks after that game I was just working on ways to make that stronger so I can come up with a solution if I see that again."
What of his stunning first season that began with Caluori yet to make a Prem appearance and ended with the teenager playing his part in stopping Bautista Delguy, albeit controversially, scoring a try to ensure England scraped to victory against Argentina in July?
"I only look back and think about it and think, wow, when I'm speaking to some of my mates about it and you actually take time to realise what's gone on in the last year," he says. "But a lot of it I'm just focused and thinking: 'If I can do that in a year, I'm focused, I'm only going to get better, I'm only going to become more disciplined, more experienced.' So I just want to carry on doing more to try and achieve more."