Train drivers have secured a significant pay rise after the threat of strike action was floated on busy routes across the UK, including on the busy London-Manchester line.
The deal, which was agreed on Saturday between Avanti West Coast and the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen (Aslef) union, is the first to be approved by Andy Burnham in his premiership.
As well as the London-Manchester line - likely to see increased ministerial traffic after the establishment of the No 10 North office - the company also operates services to other big British cities such as Birmingham, Glasgow and Liverpool.
Coming after Aslef announced plans in June to ballot members about possible strike action over pay, the deal - first reported by the Sunday Times - will be seen as a victory for the union. It includes a 3.6% pay rise for drivers, 0.7 percentage points higher than the latest inflation rate, as well as time and a half pay for working Sundays, and £720 if drivers work a fifth day in the week.
Avanti is to be renationalised under the Labour government by spring 2027, with all rail companies due to be under government control by the end of that year. The operator, which is seen as having the worst punctuality rating for any major rail company in the UK, based on figures from the Office of Rail and Road, has cut multiple services in the past year, including the 7am train between Manchester and London, which it cut and brought back in the space of a few days after public scrutiny.
The government said it had "prioritised resolving the rail union disputes, improving services for passengers and saving hundreds of millions in lost revenue to ease the burden on taxpayers".
But the shadow transport secretary, Richard Holden, said the government was "totally capitulating to their union paymasters" and that "taxpayers are being asked to stump up millions simply to save Burnham's blushes".
An Aslef spokesperson said on Saturday: "Our job is to enhance our members' terms and conditions and this deal, struck with Avanti West Coast and approved by the DFTO (Department for Transport Operator), has been accepted."
A Department for Transport spokesperson said: "We are pleased to see Avanti West Coast work with Aslef to enable a fair and affordable settlement to keep Britain's railways moving and prevent disruption for passengers."