Fisher and Crocombe make hay on good day for bowlers
Tanya Aldred
Matt Fisher, left out of England's squad for the third Test, scrawled his name in neon crayons with a career-best six for 25 as Yorkshire were bowled out for 82 in their second innings at the Oval. But that came only hours after Surrey had been bowled out for 83 in their first innings as 23 wickets fell in front of a startled crowd. It was the first time since 1950 that a day of first‐class cricket at the Oval contained elements of all four innings. Surrey, set 185 to win, creaked unhurt to reach 27 without loss at stumps.
Henry Crocombe bagged his second hat-trick in two games, as Essex collapsed like a teacup tower, losing seven wickets for six runs in 26 balls. With Simon Harmer, Zaman Akhter and Shane Snater in his pocket, Crocombe charged about Chelmsford, teammates in pursuit, and finished with five wickets - happy news indeed for his new masters at the Oval where he moves at the end of the season. Sussex then stuttered to 90 for four in their second innings, but the lead is already 188. Sam Cook was withdrawn from the game midway through by England.
The Derby-born debutant Mohammed Bin Naeem's 71 left Derbyshire the happier side after they finished 162 for two at stumps, but James Bracey's 113 had earlier propped up a Gloucestershire fightback at Bristol.
Jack Haynes' career-best 159 and Liam Patterson-White's 111 sailed Nottinghamshire past five batting points, whereupon they declared and Dillon Pennington removed both Leicestershire's openers.
Somerset just missed a fifth batting point at Taunton, but a hefty first innings lead of 247 over Glamorgan left little room for disappointment. Tom Lammonby, after being twice reprieved in the 90s from no balls of various flavours, dollied a caught and bowled for 95, and there were half-centuries for Josh Thomas, James Rew and Archie Vaughan. Mason Crane collected four wickets before, opening the batting for Glamorgan, he was caught off the last ball of the day.
Half-centuries by James Sales and Saif Zaib turned the tables on Durham who had started the day in a dominant position but tumbled down the escalator, losing seven for 48, despite 81 from David Bedingham. The leg-spinner Yuzvendra Chahal twirled out four for 36. Northamptonshire finished with a lead of 20.
A first century of the season for Rob Yates put Warwickshire in a dominant position against Hampshire, Kyle Abbott became the first Division One bowler to tick off 50 wickets, and then Hampshire collapsed to 70 for six. There was four wickets for Middlesex's Tom Helm as Lancashire were inched out for 150 at Merchant Taylor's school; while Sam Northeast's unbeaten 96 put a spring in Kent's step against Worcestershire.
Somerset's women pulled off a sensational win against Yorkshire in the one-day cup. Yorkshire needed just 10 to win off 25 overs with five wickets in hand, but proceeded to lose them all for four runs and come up five short.
Just popping back to say the chase is on at The Oval on a crazy day when 23 wickets (and counting) have fallen. Fisher , left out of the England squad, floating on air with 6-25.
This isn't a great start for Hampshire, Ali Orr gone already, for 14, Hants 2o-1 after bowling Warwicks out 398. Runs all the way down for the Bears: 109 from Rob Yates, 77 from Dan Mousley, 90 from Sam Hain and 51 from Kai Smith.
He collects his career-best bowling figures against his former team, Kuldeep lbw for one. A big bounce in Fisher's boots now. Surrey 65-8, can Ben Coad and Dom Bess stop the rot?
After Somerset's crazy Metro Bank ODC win over Yorkshire after Yorkshire lost five for four runs, (pointed out BTL), Sophie Luff, Somerset's captain said, "It's just a crazy feeling as we had no right to win that game."
Wow, at not far off a run a ball. Notts' championship rivals will not thank Leicestershire as they zoom towards 400. In a season of not that many big scores (hunch not stats) this could be up there with the best.
Five wickets and a hat-trick for Crocombe, five wicket for Fisher
Which will please his new masters at The Oval greatly. If he prospers there as much as Fisher has - who has just picked up his fifth, George Hill caught at slip, Yorkshire 59-7 - Surrey's slump may be one-season shaped.
Jonny no more, Fisher with a third wicket (for 17), flies one between bat and pad and knocks out off stump. YJB doesn't look back, tucks bat under arm and marches away. Yorkshire 51-5 lead by 153.
At MTS Lancs have limped to 80 for 5, a doughty 33 not out from Matty Hurst in just under two hours stringing things together.
Gloucs are all out for 237 and they've taken an early tea. Five wickets for Brett Randell.
Kent sneaked a 21-run lead over Worcs at Canterbury (fifty for Hose, four wickets for Hasan Mahmud), and are now 45-1 in their second innings, Crawley still there on 23.
And Northants are fighting back against the mighty Durham, from 62-4, 107-4, thanks to Saif Zaib and James Sales.
Chahar is the last man, out going for some humpty and caught at deep midwicket. Threw wickets for White, three for Coad, two for Hill. All done in 30 overs. What a to-do. Yorkshire have a first-innings lead of 102.
Fisher provides some brief respite for the Oval crowd by hitting long, but then delivers another catch to the cordon. A third for the excellent Coad. Surrey 73-9.
A blinder at third slip by Dom Bess to get rid of Tom Lawes! Lawes has dart, the ball flies above Bess' head who clutches at high speed with his right hand, pirouettes and holds on. Surrey 62-7.
Otherly, Tom Lammonby, after being twice reprieved in the 90s from no balls of various flavours, dollies a caught and bowled and is gone for 95. Somerset 223-4, lead by 29.
And Lancs are 35-4, Harris, yet to leave his trough, lbw Higgins 15; Rocky Flintoff bowled by the equally talented young thing Naavya Sharma.
And now Pope can't resist going for a sumptuous cover drive, just think about that beautiful sound off the bat, that rippling of applause, that tingling ahhhh. Anyway, he's caught off Revis . Surrey 56-6.
Sussex drop Dean Elgar, which might not be a good idea, Essex 71 for 1.
And a fourth wicket at The Oval, Foakes is squared up by George Hill, and French crickets a catch to slip. That drop at third slip by Will Luxton just after lunch didn't prove too expensive. Surrey 42-2.
Lancashire are all in a two and eight at MTS, KT lbw missing a straight one from Tom Helm, Harry Singh got a mean lifter two balls later and edged behind. Lancs 4-2. Hurst and Harris try again.
Foakes and Pope is a tasty pair to have in an emergency, as Pope jabs down at a nasty ball from Ben Coad. A nice little military moustached there by George Hill. Surrey 34-3.
Foakes and Pope form the Surrey cavalry. Yorkshire were 1-yesterday so this might mean nothing or might mean something for Surrey's relegation fears. The duck egg blue seats at The Oval are nicely scattered with spectators.
A quick squiz round the grounds before lunch - Rob Yates is in the nervous nineties in Warwickshire's 202-2 at Southampton; Notts have lost a third against Leicestershire but are plodding on, 123-3; Tom Lammonby (68) and Lewis Goldsworthy have taken Someset to within 43 of Glamorgan, with nine wickets in hand; Surrey have arady lost Rory Burns to Jack White, 14-1 in reply to Yorks' 185; and Essex have skittled out Sussex (Porter four wickets, Cook three)and are 41-0.
Wickets number nine and ten at CLS, Chahal, 4-36, making hay on a spinning pitch. Durham 205 all out.
In other news, my dad messages to say he has duly trooped up to London on his new knee to take my nephew to Middlesex v Lancashire, only to find out it was at Merchant Taylors. Bad daughtering, I knew they were going but the penny didn't drop. Lancs are fair rattling through Middx though - a combination of old dog (3-40) and young pup (3-51). Middx 209-8.
Durham have tumbled down the escalator, losing four for 37 including Bedingham for 81. Still, Ollie Robinson and Kasey Aldridge at No.s 8 and 9 means there is still soup in the pot. Two wickets for Chahal.
This is a bonkers story but well played Sam Bodano, new (provisional) holder of the world record for the longest run-up before bowling, 62 miles from Lord's to Valley End CC where he finally bowled at his dad. He's raised £6000 for the Ruth Strauss Foundation. Valley End CC, incidentally, were the winners of the Cricketer magazine/Ortus energy's Greenest Ground competition 2022.
At The Oval,Yorkshire are all out for 185. No. 8 Dom Bess stranded on 44, the second highest score. Four wickets for Tom Lawes. Old style Surrey would have steamrollered onwards. Let's see.
At Southampton, Kyle Abbot, who was off with an injured finger on Wednesday and who Russell Domingo said, "bowled fantastically well again and beat the bat on numerous occasions" gets a wicket at last: Dan Mousley for 77 .Warwicks 167-2.
While at Taunton, Josh Thomas will regret that- a lean-out of-the-window-to-shake-the-duster stretch to a ridiculously wide ball from Hamza and edges to slip. Somerset 114-1
Looks lovely at Taunton, a shirt-sleeved crowd, a bit of sun, and 106-0 on the board. Fifty for Josh Thomas, Tom Lammonby not far behind. Oooh and that's a sweet late cut by Thomas off Hamza.
Luke Hollman bends his knees deeply in anticipation of Jimmy Anderson, but he'd struggle to get them deep enough to deal with the ball that drops, rolls, and picks out off stump. Gone for 54. Ben Geddes follows three overs later, to Balderson. Middx 151-5 and need a apartnership.
Gloucestershire are rescued by the Bristol rain. This was the stoical James Bracey last night:
"We decided to bat first because we think the pitch is going to turn more as the game progresses. It's been tricky with the weather around for the last few days and the pitch under the covers, and it did help the seamers to begin with. But we have a world-class spinner in Kai Kishore in our ranks and we want to try and get the best out of him.
"We're going to need a few partnerships if we're going to get up to 200 and it's going to need a lot of hard work. It won't be pretty, but we know what we have to do in the morning. It's difficult when you're on a bad run and confidence is not at it's highest. That's one of the biggest challenges of playing county cricket."
and delayed starts at Southampton and Taunton, but we're off elsewhere and Sam Cook knocks the coconut off its perch first ball, Goodman lbw 22, Sussex 213-8.
The Met Office sages say: southern England starts the day cloudy with patchy drizzle. Elsewhere, largely dry with sunny spells. Later, rain spreads into Northern Ireland, southern Scotland and northern England, with blustery showers and possible thunderstorms in northwest Scotland. Very warm southeast, average elsewhere.
Warwickshire's captain Ed Barnard on Yates and Mousley's unbroken second wicket stand of 127 against Hampshire:
"To be put in on what could have been a difficult wicket, I thought Yates and Mousley were excellent. I thought the first hour was exceptional. It was perfect bowling conditions with the overheads, the lights on and Kyle Abbott. They dealt with that and then started to show their confidence after lunch.
"They won't be looking too far ahead as they'll have a big job to start again in the morning. They have both batted beautifully all year and they'll be hoping to kick on and get a big score."
Brydon Carse may get a chance to take out his frustrations on Northants later today, if David Bedingham ever gets out - unbeaten on 57, 1000 runs in the bag, in his last match of the season.
Yesterday's roundup: Somerset steal a march on rivals
It was slip-catching heaven at Taunton, with Somerset's fielders gobbling seven in Glamorgan's first innings, and James Rew scooping up the rest. Ben Kellaway was the only man to pass 50. Somerset's innings started under lights, but a milky sun eventually emerged to light the way and allow Somerset to steal a march on their Championship rivals, whose matches were curtailed by rain.
Charlie Bennett's pain was Jamie Porter's gain at Chelmsford after the young seamer limped off after three overs. To a background of autumnal slate, Porter then grabbed three for 32 for Essex against Sussex, who chose to bat and progressed in fits and starts. Sam Cook pocketed the 500th dismissal of his professional career.
At the Oval, Yorkshire limped along from the ignominy of one for three, which included an elegant flying catch by Ben Foakes to dismiss Will Luxton for a duck. James Wharton and Matthew Revis added 89, but Yorkshire then lost four for 21, including Jonny Bairstow, who stamped and delivered a pitch-perfect slip catch to Ollie Pope. Dan Worrall bowled beautifully for three for 24.
After making a sudden U-turn on the selection of Scott Kuggeleijn, relegation-threatened Hampshire were in trouble on the field as well. Rob Yates and Dan Mousley both embroidered half-centuries as Warwickshire piled on 141 for one between the showers.
David Bedingham passed 1,000 runs for the season in the process of an elegant fifty against Northants. There had been rebuilding to do after Durham slumped to 16 for two, a wonder ball by Luke Procter plucking out Ben McKinney's middle and off stumps and pinging them in different directions, while Will Rhodes was brilliantly run out by James Sales. Meanwhile, Division Two promotion rivals Kent had a so-so day against Worcestershire, losing five for 25 in the evening session. Daniel Bell-Drummond pinged 52.
After two months on the sidelines with a dodgy calf, Jimmy Anderson showed Lancashire what they'd been missing by reducing Middlesex to 20 for two. But Luke Hollman and Leus du Plooy steadied the ship on a damp, dark day at Merchant Taylors' School.
Gloucestershire's dismal season continued, after choosing to bat and being reduced to 62 for five against Derbyshire. Only James Bracey, flameproof boots on the burning deck, made more than 10. There were two wickets for Shoaib Bashir. Only 10.3 overs were possible at Trent Bridge, but Notts captain Haseeb Hameed, who has struggled for form this season, stroked six morale-boosting fours.
Good morning! Welcome to day two of this first autumnal Championship round. The weather looks more perky, the storylines are intriguing, so grab a coffee and join us.