Fifa on Wednesday night confirmed that Gianni Infantino will remain as president after a meeting of its senior executives in Rabat.
In a statement that also revealed Infantino has sent written apologies to the Fifa council and the 211 member associations for failing to consult them over the World Cup sell-off, the world governing body said he retains the full support of his leadership team.
Infantino had spent the day in talks with Fifa's general secretary, Mattias Grafström, and chief legal officer, Emilio García Silvero, during which he expressed his determination to stay on in the face of mounting criticism from Uefa and Concacaf - the North and Central American and Caribbean confederation - both of which have called for a review of Fifa's governance.
In another indication that he plans to carry on as before, Infantino will fly to Colombia on Thursday to attend the inauguration of the country's new president, Abelardo de la Espriella, in the city of Cali.
"Following a meeting in Rabat, Morocco, the Fifa secretary general and members of the Fifa management board in attendance reaffirmed their full support for Fifa president Gianni Infantino, as the only official elected by the 211 Fifa member associations," Fifa said. "In turn, the Fifa president reiterated his full support for the Fifa secretary general and the Fifa administration for their necessary and outstanding work in the delivery of his vision.
"It was discussed and agreed that the processes, communications and interactions between the Fifa president, the Fifa secretary general and the Fifa management board that support the delivery of this vision can and should always be continuously improved in terms of their effectiveness and efficiency.
"In this regard, Fifa's top management is fully confident that the outcomes of today's meeting will strengthen Fifa's governance, help restore confidence in the organisation and enable us to prepare for the major events and challenges ahead in a united and transparent manner while continuing our mission to develop the game around the world."
While acknowledging that Infantino has apologised for his role in the abandoned Fifa Forward Enterprise proposal, which would have meant 21% of Fifa's commercial rights being sold to private investors, the statement also made clear that Fifa will not tolerate further criticisms of its governance.
Uefa is unlikely to be cowed however, with the European governing body continuing to search for a candidate to stand against Infantino in the presidential election in March, which will also take place in Rabat.
"Mistakes made were acknowledged," Fifa said. "It was agreed that it was not the intention for the Fifa council and Fifa member associations to feel excluded from the process and that the process should have been handled differently. It was further acknowledged that errors were also made after the proposal was leaked to media.
"In a separate letter to the Fifa council and Fifa member associations, an apology was made for these errors together with a commitment to ensure they do not happen again. A review will now be conducted, and a report will be presented to the Fifa council at its next scheduled meeting.
"As previously communicated, the FFE proposal, which would have been subject to the approval of the Fifa member associations and the Fifa council, is now off the table. With the project withdrawn, it was agreed that Fifa will no longer tolerate any attacks on its integrity, good governance and due process and will take all necessary measures to protect and safeguard its name and reputation.
"There are always lessons to be learned, and Fifa will continue to improve its processes in light of this experience. In this instance, however, it is important to stress that, although mistakes were made, everything that was done was done in full compliance with the Fifa regulatory framework.
"Fifa will work closely with the relevant stakeholders to examine how it can further support the development of the game through the Fifa Forward programme for the benefit of Fifa's 211 member associations, the confederations and the regional associations."
Infantino and Grafström appeared together at the Malawi v Zambia Women's Africa Cup of Nations group game on Wednesday as a show of solidarity, having also written a jointly signed letter to Fifa council members and vice-presidents echoing the Fifa statement.