And that's a wrap, for today at least. We'll be back with another exhaustive (and probably exhausting) deadline day live blog tomorrow, covering all the madness that comes with the final few hours of the window.
Bradley Barcola to Liverpool has finally been confirmed today, in the most high-profile deal of the day - and one of the biggest deals of the summer. In fact, it could eclipse the fees Manchester City and Chelsea paid for Elliot Anderson and Morgan Rogers respectively.
Elsewhere, Everton have been busy reshaping their frontline, Newcastle are loaning out Nick Woltemade, Arsenal are selling players and failing (for now) to get Julián Alvarez and the Enzo Fernández saga rumbles on, albeit with the expectation that Chelsea will eventually sell the midfielder to City, who are also expected to land Cody Gakpo from Liverpool. Manchester United are no closer to landing a left-back or a forward, despite a few spurious rumours.
That's a lot that still needs to happen. Back tomorrow to see if, how, when and why it does happen! Thanks for joining us, as always.
Brighton are pushing to complete a deal for Millwall's Femi Azeez. Millwall want £15m for the forward, who was in the Championship team of the season last year. Brighton are yet to meet the 25-year-old's valuation but there is an expectation the deal will go through.
And that's a wrap, for today at least. We'll be back with another exhaustive (and probably exhausting) deadline day live blog tomorrow, covering all the madness that comes with the final few hours of the window.
Bradley Barcola to Liverpool has finally been confirmed today, in the most high-profile deal of the day - and one of the biggest deals of the summer. In fact, it could eclipse the fees Manchester City and Chelsea paid for Elliot Anderson and Morgan Rogers respectively.
Elsewhere, Everton have been busy reshaping their frontline, Newcastle are loaning out Nick Woltemade, Arsenal are selling players and failing (for now) to get Julián Alvarez and the Enzo Fernández saga rumbles on, albeit with the expectation that Chelsea will eventually sell the midfielder to City, who are also expected to land Cody Gakpo from Liverpool. Manchester United are no closer to landing a left-back or a forward, despite a few spurious rumours.
That's a lot that still needs to happen. Back tomorrow to see if, how, when and why it does happen! Thanks for joining us, as always.
Have Chelsea's new signings and new manager improved them and are they actually any good? Jonathan Wilson attempts to explain a winning, but slightly chaotic start to their season under Xabi Alonso.
Manchester United are open to loans for the Harry Amass, their 19-year-old left-back, who joined from Watford in 2023, and Chido Obi, the 18-year-old striker, who signed two years ago from Arsenal.
The pair are on the periphery at Old Trafford right now.
This is a bit of a shock. Karim Benzema and his club Al-Hilal have mutually agreed to terminate his contract.
Benzema, now 38, joined the Saudi Pro League club in February this year after spending three years with Al-Ittihad. It has been reported that the Frenchman will announce his decision on his future soon, although a return to a European club is believed to be unlikely; Benzema could retire altogether.
Manchester City's new signing Allan Elias has revealed he chatted to his former Palmeiras teammate Vitor Reis about signing for the club.
Reis moved from the Brazilian club to City in January 2025 before heading out on loan to Girona last season and is now embedded within Enzo Maresca's squad. Allan has now joined him in swapping São Paulo for Manchester.
"He [Reis] sent me a message, when there were still some rumours going on," Allan told the City club website. "We still haven't talked about what it's like here, but he said that when I arrived he would give me attention and talk to me and explain to me how it works."
Get your ears around the latest Football Weekly. Max, Barry, Nicky Bandini and Mark Langdon react to the weekend's football and have a chat about transfers too, of course.
Do Manchester United actually need a left-back? Kevin Wilson is not so sure.
Man Utd might be over-egging the LB issue. Clearly Lewis Hall is the preference and he isn't available but Shaw is going to play most games and Dorgu, Harry Amass and Diego Leon can all cover, let alone Dalot or Mazrouai. Unless someone who can replace Shaw now is available, then save the money.
Earlier this month, I wrote about the left-back situation here:
Tottenham news now, and it looks like Kevin Danso is off to Sunderland and Spurs are reportedly targeting Tosin Adarabioyo as his centre-back replacement - yet another new signing for Roberto De Zerbi's men. Tosin looks to be well down the pecking order at Chelsea, if not a confirmed 'bomb squad' member this summer.
Also, the BBC have gazumped my £100m player quiz by naming them all in their live blog - don't look now!
A slight correction from earlier: the Barcola deal will not quite be a British transfer record even if the add-ons are achieved to take it from £106m to £123m. That honour still belongs to the Alexander Isak to Liverpool deal, which was worth £125m.
There have now been nine signings by Premier League clubs that have surpassed the £100m mark.
Can you name the other seven not named in this post? Three were for Chelsea, two for Manchester City, one for Arsenal and one other for Liverpool.
So in lieu of a left-back or another centre-forward, could Manchester United's best signing be tying Fernandes down for another few years? He is so important to that team.
Not that United's army of online fans are likely to be placated if the club fail to land another genuine signing before the deadline.
Manchester United open contract talks with Fernandes
Jamie Jackson
Manchester United have opened initial discussions with Bruno Fernandes regarding a new deal, with the captain currently earning in the region of £220,00 a-week.
The club hold a one-year option to extent the 31-year-old's current contract, which expires next summer but are intent on him agreeing to sign on again for the longer term.
Last season, Fernandes' stellar form won him both major footballer of the year awards and he has continued in similar mode this year, scoring a hat-trick in Sunday's 5-2 trouncing of Ipswich at Old Trafford. Fernandes will be 32 on 8 September.
Some Barcola reaction for you, including a pronunciation guide for Manchester City fans:
Kev McCready says: "As an LFC fan, Barcola will improve us tremendously. I'll miss Gakpo, having only just learned how to pronounce his name correctly. It's been a strange window, with some gaps still remaining and possibly two young players coming in next year (Bruggmans, N'Guessan). Don't want to appear ungrateful, but a six and a two would have been nice. It's HACK-po by the way, City fans."
Krishna: "Regarding Barcola, we once signed one Fernando Torres for a then record transfer fee of £50m and Barry Glendenning later called him a fish for his aversion to find the net."
Chelsea are interested in Roma's Manu Koné as a possible replacement for Enzo Fernández, who remains likely to join Manchester City before the transfer window shuts.
However, the France midfielder is one of several names on Chelsea's shortlist. They also like Monaco's Lamine Camara and their interest in Bournemouth's Alex Scott and Crystal Palace's Adam Wharton is no secret. A possible move for Nottingham Forest's Morgan Gibbs-White has been played down to me.
Chelsea say they need to improve their squad if they are to sell Fernández. That could mean them signing both a winger and a midfielder.
Barcola has been chatting to the Liverpool website about making the move to Merseyside from Paris - and he's aiming big:
"It took a long time but I'm really happy today to be able to play for Liverpool," he said. "I hope to achieve very big things. First of all, winning the Premier League - it's one of my biggest dreams in my life.
"It is to do that and to stay in this team in the long term - that's why I signed a long contract - and I hope I can do it."
Doesn't it feel strange that a Premier League club can pay £123m for a player - a British transfer record - and we can all just collectively shrug? Make no mistake, Barcola is a fine footballer though, it will be fascinating to see how he fares at Anfield.
Liverpool sign Barcola from PSG in potential £123m deal
Liverpool have completed the signing of Bradley Barcola from Paris Saint-Germain for an initial £106m fee, which could rise to £123m. The France international has signed a five-year deal at Anfield. Andoni Iraola has prioritised signing wingers this summer after replacing Arne Slot. Barcola follows the arrival of Victor Muñoz as the former Bournemouth head coach aims to rebuild the frontline.
The 23-year-old was a long-term target for Liverpool who have tracked his progress over a number of seasons. Completing the transfer has been delayed while PSG awaited making their own signings to compensate for Barcola's exit. The winger attracted interested from other clubs but as adamant that he was only willing to join Liverpool and has ignored other offers.
Liverpool have targeted younger players in this window, evidenced by the signings of 21-year-old Jérémy Jacquet and 23-year-old Muñoz in the hope of building a squad for the long-term.
We have an email from someone who has watched Jamie Jaleel Jeremy Leweling (yep, that's a great name) far more than I have. "I've been a fan of Jamie Leweling since he signed for Stuttgart, so I'm thrilled at the idea of him joining Liverpool," writes Morgan Blake. "If it had been up to me, Liverpool would have gone in for him last summer. Terrific player." Bild are now reporting that Roma have now submitted second bid of €35m for the winger, however.
Allan has been talking on the Manchester City website about how proud he is to be joining the 10-times champions.
This is a surreal moment for me. Manchester City, with everything they have won over the past 15 years, are one of the most attractive clubs in the world for players. To be able to sit here today and say I have joined them is the proudest moment of my life. I love Palmeiras and always will - but the decision to come to City was an easy one. I want to be the best footballer I can be and the conversations I've had with the people at City so far has convinced me there isn't a better place for me to fulfil my ambitions. I want to promise the Manchester City fans I will give absolutely everything to make the most of this opportunity. Now the hard work begins. I will give 100% in training and make the best case possible to the manager I should be playing. My intention is to help City continue winning trophies. If I can do that, it would be a dream come true.
Doku, Semenyo, Monga, Cherki, Foden and possibly Gakpo. He'll have a fair bit of competition from forwards/wingers at the Etihad. He is versatile, though. Good luck to the lad.
Wingers are so "in" right now and Sky Sport Germany are reporting that Liverpool and Everton are going to battle it out for Stuttgart wide man Jamie Leweling. The 25-year-old Germany international is reportedly also of interest to Roma. Everton have their hands full sorting ins and outs over the next 24 hours, with the Toffees looking to offload Beto and potentially bring back Jack Grealish and Richarlison to the club, as well as finalising a deal for Folarin Balogun. That would be good news for Everton-supporting Andy Burnham - the UK prime minister would then have an easy ice-breaker if he stumbles into Donald Trump at the UN general assembly.
Claudio Echeverri is expected to be loaned to Benfica by Manchester City for the season. The 20-year-old forward joined in January 2024 from River Plate. The Argentinian has made three City appearances and previously had temporary spells at Bayer Leverkusen and Girona, one of City's sister clubs.
This has been an odd transfer window hasn't it? Key players going for modest sums. Those who are peripheral or surplus-to-requirements heading out for big money. It's made the length of contracts seem more important than ever. It's little wonder some players are forever scrawling their signatures on longer deals.
Thanks Dom. Hello folks. Let's get this lunchtime stint started then, eh? And what better way than to focus on a club that has seemingly taken up most of the transfer window's bandwidth this summer, Tottenham Hotspur! It's not a big slice of news, to be honest, with talented teenage forward Mikey Moore heading to Köln on loan. There's no deal in place for a potential sale, which shows that Spurs still value the player and expect him back, perhaps with a little more polish, next summer. And while we're on the subject of the Bundesliga, read all about Elversberg's big win at the weekend. They're the German top flight's village people, in case you were wondering.
Manchester City have confirmed the signing of Allan Elias from Palmeiras in a €37.5m plus €2.5m (£34m) deal. The 22-year-old wide forward made his senior debut for Palmeiras last year and has made 96 appearances for the club, scoring nine goals and making 12 assists. Allan is City's third major acquisition of the window following Elliot Anderson, for £116m, and Ayyoub Bouaddi, for £85m. City are open to a loan for Jack Grealish, with Everton hopeful of taking the 30-year-old.
Muñoz signs for Forest in £22m transfer from Palace
Ben Fisher
Nottingham Forest have added a key component: Daniel Muñoz has reunited with Oliver Glasner after signing in a £22m deal from Crystal Palace. One of Glasner's priorities this window was a right-wing back.
The 30-year-old Colombia international, part of Palace's Conference League and FA Cup triumphs under Glasner, has signed a three-year contract, with the option of a further 12 months. Muñoz could make his Forest debut at home to Tottenham on Saturday.
Hull and Ipswich may already have Premier League wins under their belts, but the two promoted teams are not done when it comes to incoming transfers. And it seems they are targeting the best Championship talent, a pretty standard move for newly-promoted sides.
Sky are reporting that Hull have agreed a deal to sign Sorba Thomas from Stoke - but that the Potters want to find a replacement before sanctioning the winger's exit - while Ipswich, according to TeamTalk, are closing in on Burnley striker Zian Flemming.
An email from David Wall on one of Liverpool's many current issues:
Is one of Liverpool's main problems that they've been thinking for so long about finding a partner for Van Dijk that they didn't really think about finding a replacement for him? If it wasn't already clear at times last season, it should be from the start of this. He's far from the player he was even in Liverpool's recent title-winning year and is often the source of their defensive problems now (with lack of pace and subsequent poor positioning) rather than the solution to them.
I think that's a very smart observation, David. But a centre-back doesn't appear to be on Liverpool's shortlist for the immediate term.
Chelsea: It's genuinely hard to keep track of Chelsea's ever-changing squad and it should be of no surprise to anyone that the Blues look likely to conduct more business before tomorrow's deadline.
Xabi Alonso's side may have to accommodate for the departure of Enzo Fernández, who could join Manchester City, so have Lamine Camara - also linked with Liverpool - and Roma's French midfielder Manu Koné on their shortlist of replacements. Chelsea have already signed Valentín Barco and Jordan Henderson to boost their midfield numbers this summer, with Moises Caicedo and Roméo Lavia among Alonso's first choices.
It's another Rubik's Cube of transfer possibilities Chelsea will have to unscramble in the next day or so.
Manchester United have spent £150m overhauling their midfield this summer, yet their standout midfield player in the 5-2 thumping of Ipswich came free from the pitches of Cheadle, Stockport - academy product Kobbie Mainoo.
Harry Maguire waxed lyrical about Mainoo after the 21-year-old all-round stellar midfield display at Old Trafford on Sunday.
The defender said: "I thought he was brilliant, Kobbie. To say he hasn't played for I don't know how long - not really got many minutes in pre-season and things like that, he was magnificent. He put a great shift in and I think his work without the ball has improved so much since Michael [Carrick, the manager] has been in.
"That's probably credit to Michael and his staff. But I think without the ball now, he's becoming a real monster in there, and he wins a lot of second balls. He wins a lot of duels. You won't want to play against him in there and that's the biggest compliment I can give to him from playing and watching him behind.
"He's so young, if we want him to play for this club for another 10 years, there's going to be times where he's going to go through a patch like with Rashy and myself, but that's part and parcel. I think he's really level-headed, he's really composed, he has great belief in his ability and, he's going to be a magnificent play for this club for many, many years."
Toby Podmore weighs in on email with some 'amusing transfer banter' - his words:
Concerning your post at 11hr50, what's the going price for selling Jesus these days? I imagine that inflation has made 30 pieces of silver highly uncompetitive.
I'm excited by the prospect of Gakpo joining. He's been very consistent in the Premier League - won the league, has Champions League experience, and has scored goals at the Euros and World Cup. Is he the most exciting winger in the world right now? No, probably not. But I think he offers great versatility, something not all wingers can provide. He primarily plays on the left, but can do a good job as a striker, and seems like he's not shabby on the right
wing either.
This means he can play across the entire front three and will be a great backup to Haaland/Doku/Semenyo. With City in the mix for four different competitions, he's going to get plenty of minutes, and I'm pretty confident he'll be able to deliver.
Yes, £85m is not cheap, and many will argue it's way too much for a player that's not a nailed-on starter - but I think he'd be great and would be keen to see him join.
These Unai Emery quotes have sparked a fair bit of debate, as the Spaniard was asked about Aston Villa's relationship with Chelsea given the players that have moved between the clubs this summer and in recent years.
Emi Martinez and Morgan Rogers have joined the Blues from Villa, with Alejandro Garnacho heading the other way. Last year, Villa signed Axel Disasi on loan from Chelsea and in 2024 paid £37.5m to sign Ian Maatsen from the west Londoners.
Emery said: "Good relations? They want to kill us and we want to kill them!"
"We have good players and we can sign one player off them, it's not a good relationship - it's a deal for money and a deal for players. I am happy for Emiliano Martinez and Morgan Rogers and I know I am not happy for Chelsea."
Arsenal agree to sell Jesus, Martinelli and Vieira
Arsenal are running out of time to persuade Julián Alvarez to join them from Atlético Madrid after agreeing to sell Gabriel Martinelli, Gabriel Jesus and Fábio Vieira in deals collectively worth more than £70m.
Ed Aarons has the skinny from the Emirates - it seems even the champions could be busy between now and 11pm tomorrow.
An email from regular contributor Krishna has just dropped in my inbox.
"Hello Dominic," he says. "[Folarin] Balogun is a good bargain for any team. He can commit any number of fouls and can be reinstated after a phone call from one vain man to another."
Manchester City Women have signed the Germany full-back Carlotta Wamser from Bayer Leverkusen on a four-year contract.
The 22-year-old is the defending WSL champions' third signing of the summer so far, after the England internationals Beth Mead and Niamh Charles.
Wamser, who has 14 senior caps and was part of Germany's squad at 2025's Euros, told Manchester City's media channels: "The English league is the best league in the world and Manchester City is one of the best clubs in the world. I feel like I need the next step for my career and I feel that I can develop as a player here."
City's director of football Therese Sjögran said: "We are delighted to welcome Carlotta to the Club. She is a player we've admired for some time and know she will bring energy, passion and a willingness to learn to the team. For such a young, exciting talent to trust us with the next step of her career is something we feel conveys a strong message of what we are building here at City."
Fiorentina have reportedly agreed a deal to sign Willy Gnonto on loan from Leeds, with a medical booked on Tuesday.
The Italian winger has had a curious spell at Elland Road. He began like a house on fire, then drifted in and out of the team, finding himself as a substitute more often than not last season. Perhaps a fresh start for the 22-year-old is necessary.
Liverpool fans are getting a little angsty ahead of the transfer window's final days and we've had this email from Graeme Neill:
I'm not exactly going to be sorry to see the back of Richard Hughes. Our transfer strategy over the last few seasons has been chaotic. Why we sold both Jones and Quansah remains baffling. We overpaid for Isak and, unlike Muñoz, he hasn't felt like the kind of relatively bargain buy that defined the late 2010s. And the less said about his pre-season last year and corresponding fitness issues, the better. Unless Barcola can be reinvented as Fabinho circa 2019, it's hard to get too excited about him either.
I am genuinely curious how excited City fans are about the prospect of Gakpo though.
Manchester City fans, get in touch: would you be excited to see Cody Gakpo as part of your frontline?
It's turning into quite an interesting window for Everton. Balogun should be an upgrade on Beto up front, while David Moyes has sounded quite confident about Thierno Barry's progress at the start of his second season in English football - always a crucial point in a player's development. How much game time Barry gets if and when Balogun arrives will be interesting.
Losing Ndiaye would be a loss but Richarlison is beloved on the blue side of Merseyside and a fine left-wing replacement if that deal from Spurs happens, while there is still talk of a possible second loan for Jack Grealish.
Woltemade set for Juventus loan, Everton in talks with Balogun
Nick Woltemade is closing in on a loan move from Newcastle to Juventus, a year after arriving on Tyneside in a club record £69m deal; while Everton are in talks with Monaco over a deal to sign Folarin Balogun after agreeing to sell Beto to Fiorentina.
It underlines the strangeness of Liverpool's recent transfer strategy that the understandable excitement generated by Bradley Barcola's impending £123m arrival from Paris Saint-Germain is offset by concern over the gaps in Iraola's squad that have not been filled - right-wing, right-back and central midfield being the most obvious ones. The need to improve in all three departments was evident as Liverpool had to fight back to salvage a late 2-2 draw [against Nottingham Forest]. "We don't know what the squad is going to be on 2 September," said Iraola, surely holding out hope that wingers are not the only incomings before Tuesday. "I think every analysis I can make is when I know and when everything finishes, when I will know who is going to be here all the season or until January."
West Ham: The Hammersare closing on a deal to sign the Viking winger Edvin Austbø for about £10m. The Championship club have also submitted an offer to sign Ryan Giles on loan with an option to buy, but Hull do not want to lose the left-back.
Ollie Watkins has gone from Aston Villa to the Saudi Pro League to join Al-Hilal, and the England striker will be thrown straight into a big game against Al-Ahli and faces the highest of expectations - against fellow Three Lions forward hopeful, Ivan Toney.
John Duerden reports on the two English strikers vying for Thomas Tuchel's attention from the gulf.
Liverpool: Why do the Reds want to sell Cody Gakpo, I hear you ask?
It's a good question as Gakpo, despite some criticism from fans at times, has been pretty consistent during his three-and-a-half years at Anfield, scoring 51 goals in around 180 appearances for Liverpool, playing almost exclusively on the left wing.
The departure of Mohamed Salah, plus the signing of Victor Muñoz, the emergence of Rio Ngumoha and the pending arrival of Bradley Barcola have all contributed to a situation where Liverpool believe selling Gakpo and reinvesting the cash would be a wise move.
Ngumoha, Muñoz and Barcola are all better on the left flank, where Gakpo likes to play, while Liverpool have right-sided forwards - such as Brighton's Yankuba Minteh and Ismaïla Sarr of Crystal Palace - on their radar. It seems Liverpool want to address the balance of their attack and Gakpo is the fall guy. Still, selling to Manchester City, as has been suggested, would be surprising. Big clubs don't like to sell first team players to their rivals.
The end of a long summer of transfers is nigh: but not before a final, desperate, scrap for signings ensues in the final couple of days of the window. It never ceases to amaze us how and why clubs allow this to happen... but it provides compelling reading and watching as the deals roll in.
There are a number of 'sagas' to keep your eyes on: Cody Gakpo, Enzo Fernández and Ismaïla Sarr are three high-profile Premier League stars who could be on the move, with Liverpool, Chelsea and Manchester City three big clubs who ought to be very active in the next day or two. They won't be alone. The signings keep on coming at Tottenham - and the Spurs owners may decree that more are required after a disappointing start to the season. Then there is Manchester United and their left-back situation, while lower down the English top flight the likes of Fulham and Crystal Palace, with new managers, will feel they must strengthen. And don't forget about big deals around the continent, and in the women's game.
So much to happen, to little time. Do join us throughout today and tomorrow as we build towards that 11pm (BST) transfer deadline tomorrow (Tuesday) when the window - and we're obliged to say this - SLAMS SHUT. The deadline for WSL clubs is on Thursday 3 September.