With 25 minutes to go against Manchester United, the Everton supporters had something to roar about as Jack Grealish made his return after rejoining on loan. The attacking midfielder remains universally popular thanks to his desire to entertain, getting the hosts back on their feet by creating dangerous situations within seconds of his arrival. Everton were limited in the final third for long periods as Thierno Barry sat on the periphery. If David Moyes is to keep his side pushing for a top-half finish, he will need Grealish to be a creative focal point. Will Unwin
Match report: Everton 2-2 Manchester United
There was no shortage of highlights from the new arrivals as Arsenal battled back to beat Chelsea, Morgan Rogers setting the tone with a well-taken goal within two minutes. Emi Martínez got a hostile reception on his return to the Emirates but, while he may feel disappointed not to have kept out Kai Havertz's opener, he made a handful of excellent saves, a diving stretch to deny Bukayo Saka the best of the bunch. Ezri Konsa, on his first start for Arsenal, had the home fans on their feet after a thunderous slide tackle to stop Rogers early in the second half, the standout moment of a solid performance. It was Christos Tzolis who really took the game by the scruff of the neck, however, harrying Chelsea's defence with mazy dribbles and driving runs forward. He also provided the diagonal ball which, via Havertz's audacious dummy, set up Martin Ødegaard to score the winner, earning a first Premier League assist. Will Magee
Match report: Arsenal 2-1 Chelsea
If Thomas Tuchel required a reminder of precisely how good Alex Scott is, the Bournemouth midfielder provided it at St James' Park. The 23-year-old reads the game a little faster and a little better than those around him and his stellar passing range raised the tone in a game Marco Rose's side really should have won after cantering into a 2-0 lead, with Scott helping to create both goals. While Newcastle's manager, Matthias Jaissle, can be heartened by his team's refusal to surrender and, courtesy of goals from Harvey Barnes and Jacob Ramsey, their ultimate collection of a point, for long periods his players found no answers to Scott's questions. Surely a first senior England cap beckons. The forthcoming Nations League fixtures against Spain, Croatia and Czechia offer ideal openings for Tuchel to put Scott on the international stage his talent demands. Louise Taylor
Match report: Newcastle 2-2 Bournemouth
The omens don't look good for Álvaro Arbeloa. Only twice before have Fulham started a top-flight season with three successive defeats and it ended with relegation on both occasions: in 1951-52 and in 2020-21 under Scott Parker. Arbeloa tried to concentrate on the positives after throwing away the lead twice against Crystal Palace and ending up losing to Ben Chilwell's winner. His side looked dangerous in attack, with Josh King having already developed an understanding with the summer signing Gonzalo García, even if the Spaniard played a comical role in Tyrick Mitchell's second equaliser. Fulham's defending is another matter entirely: Joachim Anderson's lack of pace was repeatedly exposed by the high line they deployed against Palace and Arbeloa must find a solution before facing his former club Liverpool and then Manchester United. "We knew that this month would be very tough," said Arbeloa. "But I told my players it will not define our entire season." Ed Aarons
Match report: Fulham 2-3 Crystal Palace
Several positives for Liverpool in Suffolk on Friday: Bradley Barcola showing off his lightning speed in his cameo, Ronald Araújo solid in the troublesome right-back position and Alexander Isak coming back to the boil with two well-taken goals. Receiving the most plaudits in post-match was Cody Gakpo, who appeared headed for Manchester City or Tottenham in the transfer window but stayed on to supply both Isak goals. "Cody knows how much we value him," said Andoni Iraola. The confirmed exit of the sporting director, Richard Hughes, on Saturday brought assessments of a mixed legacy. Eventually, Isak repeating the form of his Newcastle days may stamp the decision to pay a record fee for the striker. Florian Wirtz, another expensive Hughes purchase, continues to receive similarly mixed reviews. At Ipswich, attention was drawn to his losing possession 22 times. It was left to Gakpo, whose purchase and sale were deals Hughes did not do, to provide Liverpool's creative edge. John Brewin
Match report: Ipswich 0-2 Liverpool
Iliman Ndiaye enthused about working hard in his Manchester City debut after his £65m transfer from Everton. "I ran my backside off for the team wanting to get the win and you have to do the dirty side sometimes," said the Senegalese forward, who was removed on 87 minutes, and brushed off how he might have joined Tottenham instead. "It was always going to be City. I wanted Champions League [football] and to play for one of the best teams in the world. I'm not saying Tottenham is not but when Manchester City comes through you don't say no. It's been a good week for me and topped off with a win. I was just being patient and when City came through I was buzzing." Jamie Jackson
Match report: Manchester City 1-0 Coventry
There were plenty of questions for Fabian Hürzeler to answer after Brighton's draw with Leeds, namely why it took them the best part of an hour to wake up. But, for consecutive weekends, the Brighton manager had the pleasure of lauding Malick Yalcouyé's performance. The 20-year-old was barely known even by his own club's fans at the start of the campaign, having spent seasons on loan at Sturm Graz and Swansea since joining from Gothenburg for a reported £6m in July 2024. He has since started against Chelsea and Leeds, excelling in an attacking midfield role. Hürzeler said: "He shows a lot of energy, a lot of effort, he is good in possession and out of possession." The Brighton manager has previously flagged Yalcouyé's physicality as an area to improve and it is notable just how slight he is at just 5ft 7in. The Ivorian's confidence, eagerness to enter combat and close control are in no doubt. He could be the next player off the conveyor belt of young talent who Brighton sell for a vast profit. Ben Bloom
Match report: Brighton 1-1 Leeds
On the eve of Tottenham firing blanks for the third straight game, Roberto De Zerbi joked Allan Dixon's bodybuilder physique could help them threaten at set pieces. Tottenham's player liaison, who is Daniel Levy's brother-in-law, moved up the pecking order again after Spurs failed to score in their first three league games for the first time since 1974-75. The club spent more than £300m this summer, Sandro Tonali the pick of the new signings on a blunt outing at the City Ground. De Zerbi praised Spurs' spirit in the stalemate, epitomised by Tonali during a first-half duel with Dan Ndoye which culminated in a Forest corner. "I think it will be an advertising clip for the Premier League," said Forest's head coach, Oliver Glasner. "This is what the league is famous for and everyone loves." Ben Fisher
Match report: Nottingham Forest 0-0 Tottenham
Nilson Angulo, who scored for Ecuador against Germany at the World Cup, remains an enigmatic presence, at once robust and delicate, cunning and naive, deft and clumsy. At times, not obviously related to the game going on around him, he will simply stop, and waggle his legs around as though stirring paint with his feet. One volleyed flick with the back of his ankle to return an overhit cross to the middle was remarkable. He is a master of accelerating and suddenly slowing to create space, control immaculate, then at other times he will simply charge out of play. The only thing harder than marking him, perhaps, is playing alongside him, trying to work out if a cross is ever going to come. He is a magnificent agent of chaos, that is clear; whether he is a high-grade footballer is less obvious. Jonathan Wilson
Match report: Brentford 1-1 Sunderland
Not many teenage centre-halves play regularly in the Premier League, but the Australia international Lucas Herrington is quietly establishing himself in Hull's acclimatisation to the top flight. The summer signing from Colorado Rapids celebrated turning 19 on Saturday by coming off the bench against Aston Villa to help the Tigers keep another clean sheet. Herrington is rated as one of the finest defensive prospects in world football and underlined his promise with a vital block to deny Tyrone Mings. In all three of Hull's Premier League games this season, Herrington has featured from the bench and the Queenslander's star should continue to rise throughout the season. The Hull manager, Sergej Jakirovic, said: "Herrington is excellent and has great potential, so all these minutes are invaluable for him. I don't have any fear when he's on the pitch and I believe in him 100%. Provided he stays healthy, anything is possible." Ross Heppenstall
Match report: Hull 0-0 Aston Villa