Thank you for joining us, not just today but for the entire World Cup. This is the end of the liveblogging for the tournament and it's been a hell of ride.
Spain's King Felipe VI thanked the country's World Cup-winning squad on Monday, telling the players their triumph belonged to the whole nation.
"When our national team plays, we all play. When you won, you won for all of Spain," he said at a reception for the squad after they won Spain's second World Cup title.
"You have shown your grit, your resilience and your courage, always backed by your technical skill, your control and command of the game, combining head and heart."
The king was joined by Queen Letizia, who wore a red dress to match the Spanish team's jerseys, and their two daughters, Princess Leonor and Princess Sofia.
Felipe greeted and shook hands with each player, leaning in for a hug with teenage sensation Lamine Yamal.
The squad is due to meet Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez and then take part in an open-top bus parade through central Madrid, where large crowds in national team colours had already gathered. AFP
Italy are interested in appointing Pep Guardiola as their new head coach, the Press Association understands.
The Italian federation (FIGC) has the Spaniard in its sights after he brought his 10-year stint at Manchester City to an end in May. The federation's new technical director, Paolo Maldini, is leading the recruitment process as Italy aim to end a miserable run of missing out on major tournaments.
Sky in Italy has reported that the federation has actually already met Guardiola in an effort to convince him to take on the role.
Italy's failure to qualify for this summer's World Cup was the third time in a row they had missed out on the finals, having won the trophy for the fourth time in 2006.
Guardiola left City at the end of last season having led the club to 20 trophies, including six Premier League titles and the 2023 Champions League. He previously enjoyed great success with Barcelona - the club where he shone as a player - winning the Champions League twice and three LaLiga titles, before moving on to Bayern Munich and claiming three Bundesliga crowns.
In between those jobs Guardiola took a sabbatical, and it has been reported he intends to take a similar break from coaching now, so Italy may struggle to convince him to make such a swift return. PA Media
"Everyone at Scunthorpe United is devastated to hear of the passing of former player Kevin Keegan at the age of 75," Keegan's first club said.
"A member of the club's hall of fame, Keegan started his career with Scunthorpe after coming through the youth ranks before breaking into the first team and surpassing 100 appearances for United between 1968 and 1971, scoring 24 times during his three-year stint at the Old Show Ground that saw him attract attention from Bill Shankly's Liverpool side.
"Keegan was considered one of the best players of his generation and enjoyed a stellar playing career, making almost 750 club appearances, lifting the First Division trophy three times with Liverpool and winning the Ballon d'Or back-to-back in 1978 and 1979 while playing for Hamburg in the Bundesliga.
"Following his illustrious playing career, Keegan would go on to establish himself as one of the very best England had to offer, having stints as England manager as well as being boss of Newcastle United, Fulham and Manchester City.
"With a constant smile on his face, Keegan returned to the Attis Arena in late 2025 to witness the matchday atmosphere once again, giving the Scunthorpe players a pre-match team talk using his inspirational demeanour, before taking time to speak to each and every person he encountered, highlighting his brilliant personality.
"Our thoughts and heartfelt condolences go out to all of "King Kev's" family, friends and loved ones at this incredibly difficult time."
The BBC has increased its lead over ITV as the UK's favoured World Cup broadcaster despite the high-profile departure of Gary Lineker as its main presenter.
Data compiled by Barb, seen by the Guardian, shows that the BBC's peak audience share for Sunday's final, presented by Gabby Logan, was four times greater than ITV's, an increase from 3.25 times at the 2022 final in Qatar.
The BBC's average audience share for TV viewers was 4.06 times greater than ITV's, compared with 3.4 times four years ago, with the Barb figures not including viewers watching on a digital stream.
The BBC's peak audience was 15.8m on TV and iPlayer, with ITV's comparable figure 3.8m.
Back to the World Cup ... Jonathan Liew has found hope.
Football's role as a nation builder is often overstated. France's World Cup triumph in 1998 was hailed as a vindication of the country's multiethnic identity, but four years later it sent Jean-Marie Le Pen into the final round of the presidential election. Argentina's 1978 victory on home soil generated a surge of popularity for the country's military dictatorship, but by 1983 it had collapsed. England's run to the European Championship final in 2021 did not, for all the good vibes and open letters, arrest our wider descent into gutter politics and culture war.
But occasionally it can hold up a mirror. And perhaps what this World Cup reflects back at us is a kind of messy hope: that a world of hardening physical borders is doomed to disintegrate on contact with reality. That for all the flags and pageantry, nationality is ultimately little more than a brand, a consumer choice, a piece of content - a mask anyone can happily wear for six weeks, and shed just as easily.
"The Bundesliga family is truly saddened to hear of the passing of football legend, Kevin Keegan.
"During three seasons with @HSV, Keegan helped the club to win their very first Bundesliga title in 1978/79 while claiming back-to-back Ballon d'Or awards in 1978 and 1979. Keegan also helped Hamburger SV to reach the European Cup Final in 1979/80. Mighty Mouse, as he was affectionately known by HSV supporters, scored 40 goals in 113 appearances for HSV during his tenure.
"Our condolences go out to his family, friends and everyone associated with Hamburger SV."
Our north-east correspondent Louise Taylor on Keegan's relationship with Newcastle:
The story of Kevin Keegan and Newcastle United is perhaps best described as a three-act play. It involves an enduring and mutual love affair that brings joyous seasons in the sun punctuated by boardroom tensions and tear-stained exits.
Newcastle fans swiftly identified Keegan as a player and then, twice, a manager capable of switching the lights on at St James' Park. "Special K" made everything about the club seem more vivid and exciting. To watch his 1990s "Entertainers" was to feel truly alive.
Kevin Keegan, who has died aged 75, is the only British player to win the Ballon d'Or twice, was the star of Liverpool's first European Cup-winning team, a messianic figure at Newcastle United as a player and coach, forging a team so memorable that Fifa's president wrote to commend him, and the only Englishman to both captain and manage the men's national team. And yet, as Keegan would ruefully reflect, he will principally be remembered by many for an emotional outburst that precipitated Newcastle's historic failure in a Premier League title race, a TV interview which presaged the coming era of the modern game.
I am sure neutrals will remember the joys of Newcastle's football under Keegan. It was an exciting time for the Premier League with the likes of David Ginola and Faustino Asprilla thriving thanks to the freedom Keegan provided.
I should say, on a personal level, Keegan gave me one of my favourite ever seasons as a City fan. We absolutely smashed the Championship playing fantastic football, with Ali Bernabia pulling the string, it felt like we would won 5-0 every week.
Man City laud 'transformative' Keegan: "Everyone at Manchester City is devastated to learn our former manager Kevin Keegan has passed away, aged 75.
"Kevin was a transformative manager who brought optimism and vibrancy to City during his four-year spell in charge.
"The promotion campaign in 2001/02 will never be forgotten, and Kevin then established us once again as a top Premier League side in the years that followed.
"Our thoughts are with Kevin's family and friends at this very difficult time."
Newcastle pay tribute to Keegan, who played for and managed the club: "We are devastated to learn of the passing of Kevin Keegan, one of the most iconic, influential and deeply loved figures in our club's history.
"Kevin was more than a legendary footballer and manager. He was the beating heart of Newcastle United for generations of supporters.
As a player, he brought world-class talent, ambition and belief to St. James' Park, helping to transform perceptions of what Newcastle United could be.
As a manager, he ignited our city. Kevin gave supporters hope and pride, and led a team whose style, spirit and passion captured the imagination of football fans around the world. He was so much more than an Entertainer.
Righto, that's it from me for now and this World Cup. Thanks all for your company and comments across the piece - it's been an absolute joy - now here's Will Unwin to bring it home.
Back to De la Fuente, I'll be really interested to see how England approach that match against Spain in the context of what happened against Argentina. Will they commit to attack, will the balance of the team change, and will Tuchel still be manager? I know the FA said what they said, but elite sport is ruthless and unforgiving; I can't imagine the players are especially eager to see him again.
The 5ft 8in combative "Mighty Mouse" was not, by his own admission, a natural talent but the son of a south Yorkshire miner trained hard, remained humble and never ducked a challenge, traits that endured him to the Kop. "I learned so much from Shanks. He used to say: 'If I was a road-sweeper, my street would be the cleanest in the borough.' I took that to heart,' he said.
Kevin Keegan, the former England and Newcastle manager who was twice European football of the year and a stalwart member of Liverpool's serial First Division and European champions in the 1970s, has died aged 75.
Keegan's family revealed in January 2026 that he had cancer, and in June he revealed himself that it was stage four, the most advanced stage. "It is with immense sadness that we announce that Kevin Keegan has passed away at the age of 75," read a family statement. "Kevin had been battling cancer and was surrounded by his wife and daughters in his final moments.
"A double Ballon D'or winner, Kevin was a much loved husband, father and grandfather. The family would like to thank Kevin's incredible medical team for all their support. This is a hugely difficult time and they are requesting space and privacy."
"It was written, and we deserve it," said a delighted De la Fuente, who has led Spain to European titles at under-19, under-21 and senior level before this triumph. "This team and this wonderful fanbase deserve everything. We had a date with destiny and we wanted to make it count.
"The players have asked me what we have left to win. Together we've figured out that it's the next match in September [against England in the Nations League] because this team is tireless."
Not quite sure about this, from Ferran Torres, but. How does one squeeze solid gold?
"This isn't just my goal," the Barcelona forward said. "It's for 47 million people. I want to grab the cup and squeeze it. In the end, when you've got Messi on the opposing team, you do get a bit nervous, but we always try to play our own game."
We might also note that the 2010 final was also a terrible game, and that this it not because Spain made it so, rather their opponents felt it the only way Spain might be beaten. Never has there been a style of football harder to get one over on.
And who takes the Ballon d'Or? Can we really give it to Rodri, who didn't do much during the season, or Lamine Yamal, who didn't do loads during the World Cup? If not, does that leave us with Pau Cubarsi?
Tuchel leaving lewis Hall out of his England squad, never mind the first XI, is still grinding my gears'.
Villa meantime, have bought Johan Manzambi, so I guess feel they can spend the Tielemans money on a less creative player - though £38m seems a lot given Wolves went down.
Something Thomas Tuchel might do well to notice: as ever, Spain were balanced in midfield. They had Rodri, a proper six; Fabián Ruiz, and eight; and Olmo, a 10 able to muck in deeper. That is how you take and sustain control of a game, not by picking three similar players, none of whom you feel able to omit, as Luis de la Fuente did with Pedri.
Lowkey, Dani Olmo was one of my players of the tournament. I love his desire to create mischief - he's a player defenders can't take their eyes off - and the clarity of his decision-making. To keep Pedri out of a team, you've got to be special, and he is.
Thanks Martin - or should that be Martín - and hi again all. The below photo has reminded me that the king of Spain - no not Ashley Giles - along with the Queen and their kids - decided it was for them to insinuate themselves into the squad's post-match, on-pitch celebrations. No para mí, Claudio.
The Spain squad have posed for a photograph together on the tarmac ...
... and with that I will hand you to Daniel Harris. I think this is my last stint on the World Cup news blog until 2030 (the year, not 8.30pm tonight), so until then, take care, thanks for reading, and thanks for all your BTL comments. Adiós!
Madrid mayor says city is readying to 'celebrate and greet a team that will live for ever in our memory'
Sam Jones
Sam Jones is in Madrid for the Guardian
Madrid's mayor, José Luis Martínez Almeida, told Radio Nacional de España that the capital was working to give the team the homecoming they deserved. He also hailed the peaceful and joyous scenes that had greeted Spain's victory.
"Even though there were thousands and thousands of people on the streets last night, there were practically no incidents in the city," he said.
"We're getting everything ready for tonight and the musical events should starts at Cibeles from about 6pm, with the parade scheduled to start at 7pm - but all this is depends on various factors ... The thing we're focusing on is how to celebrate and greet a team that will live for ever in our memory."
Spain team expected to meet King Felipe after arriving in Madrid
Sam Jones
Sam Jones is in Madrid for the Guardian
The team have a busy afternoon and a long night ahead of them. Their first official stop is expected to be the Zarzuela palace outside Madrid, where they will be greeted by King Felipe and Queen Letizia at about 4.30pm. After that, they're due to head to the Moncloa palace - the office and residence of the prime minister - for 6pm
The PM, Pedro Sánchez, is presently on a trip to Algeria, but may hotfoot it back to Madrid to welcome the squad. After that, the victory parade kicks off in earnest, and will travel from Moncloa into town at around 7pm. The focus of the festivities will be the Plaza de Cibeles just outside Madrid city hall. Expect music, massive crowds - and another busy few hours for Madrid's tireless municipal street cleaners.
Victorious Spain team land in Madrid for heroes' welcome
Spain's winning World Cup team has landed in Madrid, with tens of thousands of fans expected to greet them during the course of the day.
Less than 24 hours after lifting the trophy in the New York New Jersey stadium, Spain's squad are back home. The Iberia aircraft carrying the squad touched down at Madrid-Barajas airport at 14:30 local time under clear blue skies.
Sam Jones has just messaged me to say the Spanish team have landed. This is the most writing I've had to do about tracking a flight since the day Priti Patel was flying back to get sacked. 2017, that was. Simpler times.
It's fair to say that Madrid - and the rest of Spain - is quite excited by the prospect of the team's imminent return. La Roja is due to touch down at Adolfo Suárez Madrid-Barajas Airport in around 10 minutes.
According to El País, the first of many heroes' welcomes is already massing at the airport, which sits at the northeastern edge of the capital.
Between 200 and 300 fans are already waiting at Terminal 4 of the airport to welcome the Spanish national team after their World Cup victory. Families with children, groups of friends, and supporters who have traveled from all over the country are lining up in a makeshift corridor, wearing Spanish jerseys, waving flags around their necks, and using their mobile phones, hoping to catch a glimpse of Luis de la Fuente's team.