Novak Djokovic capped an outstanding week at the China Open with his first title for nearly a year. The 39-year-old profited from the retirement of his final opponent, Alex de Minaur, after only one game of the second set to win a seventh title in Beijing and maintain his record of never having lost at the tournament.
The 7-6, 0-1 victory means Djokovic has won at least one title in each of the past 21 years, while he now has 102 tour level trophies overall. Both men reached the final without having to complete their matches on Monday - Djokovic thanks to the much-publicised disqualification of Daniil Medvedev, while De Minaur's opponent Hubert Hurkacz pulled the plug because of injury.
Djokovic edged a very tight first set on a tie-break before the two men each took a medical timeout, but it came as a big surprise when De Minaur abruptly shook hands after winning the opening game of the second set. The Australian, who returned to court with strapping on his left thigh, said in his on-court interview: "I want to say sorry to all the amazing fans that came to watch this match. I didn't want to finish like this."
When Djokovic lost in the opening round of the US Open amid ongoing physical struggles, the sporting obituaries were being prepared, but the Serb has shown once again that writing him off would be premature.
Djokovic, who also defeated the top seed, Alexander Zverev, during his run, said: "It's been 11 years since I played here last. I always have high expectations for myself and always want to visualise myself with the trophy, but particularly here in Beijing, the place where I've never lost.
"I was also quite aware that reality's a little bit different these days. This year has been quite challenging for me, lots of ups and downs and physical and health issues, so I was just trying to find a good feeling on the court.
"I know that when I'm feeling well and striking the ball well I can still compete at the highest level. This week has been an evidence to that. I'm very proud. This trophy means much more than one trophy, one tournament."
Earlier, Carlos Alcaraz defeated Jiri Lehecka in the final of the Japan Open to win his first individual title since February. Playing only his third tournament since returning from four and a-half months out with a wrist injury, Alcaraz recovered from a shaky start to defeat the Czech Lehecka 7-6, 6-4.
It is a second title in a row in the Japanese capital for Alcaraz, who showed patchy form at times but finished strongly. The Spaniard told Sky Sports: "I'm really happy to be able to lift a trophy again. It's been a while and obviously it's extra special after my injury.
"It was a tough week that I didn't find my best tennis, my best level, but I did find the good solutions and I think that's what matters in the end. I would say today was the best match of the week, or at least more consistent the level that I played, so I'm just really, really happy."
Meanwhile, Jannik Sinner confirmed on Tuesday that he will be out for the rest of the year due to an injured knee.
"On the advice of his medical team, Jannik Sinner will follow a course of treatment for inflammation in his knee," his team said in a statement. "The decision has been made to have the treatment now to give Jannik the necessary time to recover before beginning preparations for 2027. As a result, Jannik will be unable to compete again during the 2026 season."