With 10 top-flight goal contributions between them across three games already this season, the Chelsea trio of Morgan Rogers, João Pedro and Cole Palmer are the early pace-setters for the Premier League's most prolific, fluid and high-octane attacking unit. But on the occasion of his 100th Premier League appearance, a scruffier and more ungainly unit will be hoping to steal their thunder, as high-flying Hull try to register a top-flight win against Chelsea for the very first time. Yet to score this season but with a couple of near misses to his name, what Oli McBurnie has thus far lacked in goal contributions he has more than made up for with selfless graft and off-the-ball grunt work, making a total mockery of Steve Clarke's decision not to include him in Scotland's World Cup squad. The Hull striker ought to prove a real handful for a decidedly porous home defence, and a goal would be a fitting way to mark a century of Premier League appearances. Chelsea have not won any of their past four league matches against promoted opposition and, given Hull's blistering start to the season, victory on Saturday seems anything but a foregone conclusion. Barry Glendenning
This might be an opportune moment for Álvaro Arbeloa to meet Andoni Iraola, though perhaps not his Liverpool team. With three defeats and seven goals conceded from his first three Premier League games as Fulham head coach, questions are already being asked over the former Liverpool defender's ambitious approach. Just as they were when Iraola failed to win any of his first nine league games in charge of Bournemouth. Trust yourself and the process, might be the Liverpool head coach's advice if asked. Fulham have been creative under Arbeloa but are easily exposed defensively. Liverpool, starting to click in attack under their new head coach, have the assets to exploit Fulham's weaknesses and subject Arbeloa to an uncomfortable Anfield return. Iraola's wide options could be reduced, however, with Bradley Barcola suffering cramp on Wednesday - his first start since France's World Cup semi-final loss - and Cody Gakpo nursing a minor injury. Andy Hunter
Cheick Doucouré has had a rotten run of luck with injuries. Just when the Mali midfielder looked as if he was ready to make a first Crystal Palace appearance since January 2025 in Tuesday's Carabao Cup win over Middlesbrough, he was taken ill. Pierre Sage revealed last week that Doucouré looked as if he had "given him one million dollars" when he was informed he would be part of the matchday squad at Fulham, where Palace got off the mark with a 3-2 victory. Sage has confirmed that the 26-year-old, who has been sidelined with two serious knee injuries but was once a transfer target for Liverpool, could be involved against Ipswich at Selhurst Park on Saturday. Whenever he does return it is sure to be a heartwarming moment. Ed Aarons
The midfield battle between Brentford and Bournemouth will be crucial on Saturday, with Vitaly Janelt and Mamadou Sangaré setting the tempo for Keith Andrews' physical side. Brentford top the Premier League for aerial duels won (22.3 per 90 mins), interceptions (11.3 per 90), and fouls committed (16.3 per 90). "They defend well as a team, their high pressing is good," said Bournemouth's Marco Rose, who is hoping to guide his side to a first Premier League victory of the season. "Their transition, they have fast players. They have quality everywhere on the pitch, and every situation." Rose's answer for Brentford's aggressiveness should be Alex Scott, who leads his team for interceptions and has drawn nine fouls so far this campaign - the fourth-highest tally in the league. Late drama could also be the deciding factor at the Vitality Stadium. Despite leading in all three of their opening league fixtures, Bournemouth have picked up just two points and four of their five goals conceded have arrived from the 84th minute onwards. History favours their opponents too, as the Cherries have failed to win any of their eight top-flight meetings with the Bees. Yara El-Shaboury
A summer of change at Aston Villa inevitably prompted plenty of noise but most of their new signings were long-standing targets, none more so than Nicolas Jackson. Unai Emery kickstarted Jackson's career at Villarreal and, after reuniting at Villa, the Senegal striker scored his first goal at Club Brugge on Tuesday after his initial £47.5m move. Jackson has replaced Ollie Watkins, who proved a reliable source of goals across six straight top-flight seasons, and the early evidence has been encouraging. "I had a couple of fights with him when he was at Chelsea so when he first came in I thought: 'What's he going to be like?' but he's a brilliant guy," said the Villa captain, John McGinn. "There's a lot of expectation with the transfer fee but he's going to be a huge player for us." Ben Fisher
Only the most pessimistic home fans at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium will be gripped by anything resembling the kind of dread, anxiety and outright terror that accompanied Everton's visit on the final day of last season, but the return of David Moyes' side so early in the current campaign will still make for nervous viewing. With no goals and just one point on the board after three league games, fan faith in Roberto De Zerbi - and the hundreds of millions of pounds lavished upon new signings - has created a prevailing presumption that Tottenham will soon start firing on at least some, if not all, cylinders. In Everton, Spurs welcome a team whose record in this corner of north London is worse than any other top-flight side's. Should they fail to beat a team who have taken just seven points from the past 51 available to them away at Tottenham, the sounds of early but outright mutiny are likely to be audible from the stands. BG
Old acquaintance will be renewed at the Stadium of Light on Saturday evening. While Sunderland's captain and midfield anchor, Granit Xhaka, needs no introduction to his former north London public, the home centre-half Dan Ballard is a former Arsenal youth captain who joined the Gunners' academy at the age of eight. Then there is Bruno Guimarães. Newcastle's former captain can expect a hot reception as his new side aim to extend their season-opening run of five straight wins (including the Community Shield). "Arsenal are flying, they're one of the best teams in Europe," says Régis Le Bris, Sunderland's manager. "It will be challenging but I'm very excited to experience this situation again." Thanks to goals from Ballard and Brian Brobbey, Le Bris choreographed a 2-2 Premier League draw against Mikel Arteta's side on Wearside last November. "When you face a strong opponent you can become a bit shy but the most important thing is to be ourselves," says Le Bris. "Arsenal are so adaptive they will find solutions, so we must be flexible." Louise Taylor
One of three teams, along with Aston Villa and Tottenham, yet to score a top-flight goal this season, Coventry were extremely unfortunate not to break their duck at Manchester City last weekend. Their having narrowly avoided handing Frank Lampard's side an early opener, it took a string of excellent saves from Gianluigi Donnarumma to ensure City took three points at the death. "They played really well against Manchester City and created a lot of chances," said Fabian Hürzeler, who takes his Brighton team to the CBS Arena on Sunday afternoon. Having been scathing in his criticism of his own side's lack of energy and intensity in their woeful first-half performance against Leeds, the German will be aware that a similarly lethargic performance from his team is unlikely to go unpunished. Particularly away from home against a promoted team that may be firing blanks, but visibly grew in confidence with each passing minute of their defeat by one of the league's best teams. BG
Manchester derby No 199 features a fascinating showdown between two young managers operating in the sport's rarefied air: Michael Carrick, 45, who seeks to guide Manchester United to an 82nd victory in the fixture, and Enzo Maresca, 46, who aims for Manchester City's 63rd. As the great Pep Guardiola's successor, the visiting Italian can be delighted at his team's perfect record from their four games under him since the Community Shield defeat. Carrick, though, should be disappointed at the return from an opening three matches as United's permanent manager: a defeat at Hull and draw at Everton, with the 5-2 home win over Ipswich sandwiched between. United fans will protest beforehand about the club's approach to eradicating ticket touting, and the occasion should be particularly spicy and vibrant. Jamie Jackson
Two teams unbeaten in the Premier League this season, two German managers in the dugouts and a Monday night goalkeeping beauty contest at Elland Road. While Daniel Farke welcomes his compatriot Matthias Jaissle to West Yorkshire for the first time, James Trafford - the £40m England keeper Newcastle tried to sign on three separate occasions - will be in goal for Leeds. The visitors eventually turned their attentions to the £26m Czechia goalkeeper Lukas Hornicek, who arrived on Tyneside from Braga in July. So far at least, Jaissle is delighted by the 24-year-old's performances. "Lukas is an amazing signing," said Jaissle. "Coming to the Premier League and dealing with the pressure is not easy and, as a keeper, that pressure is something else. I like Lukas a lot. He's so calm but so mature as well. There's not even a hint of nervousness. He gives the whole team confidence. That helps a lot." LT