Georgia Hunter Bell says she is ready to take on the "Big Three" of Audrey Werro, Keely Hodgkinson and Femke Broeders-Bol in a race for the ages over 800m in Zurich next week.
Hunter Bell has had an extraordinary season, adding the 1500m European Championship title on Sunday to her Commonwealth 800m gold and 1500m world indoor crown. She is now ready to put herself to the test in a fast-paced 800m against the three Birmingham medallists.
"There is still a lot left of the season," said Hunter Bell. "I haven't done a paced 800m yet, I have one coming up with the speedy girls. I am really excited to throw my hat into the ring there. Had a bit of fomo when I saw them on the podium. It's such an exciting time. I am really happy."
There are some who believe that a fast-paced 800m in Zurich could get close to the world record of 1min 53.28sec, set in 1983 by the Czech Jarmila Kratochvilova, especially with the Swiss star Werro having run 1:53.80 this season - the third fastest in history.
Hunter Bell could certainly be in the mix given she appears to be in the form of her life. "I haven't run a personal best so far this year yet but weirdly you could say I'm having my best year because I keep on winning," she said.
Hunter Bell also revealed that she and the top trio had been talking to the world champion Lilian Odira about setting up a big five clash before the end of 2026.
"I can't wait for that, hopefully the big five will come together soon," she added. "We've been talking after the races. 'When are you racing? You should get into this one.' There's a good competitive spirit."
The most likely opportunity is the Ultimate Championships in Budapest next month, where there will be a $150,000 (£110,000) first prize on the line. "In a good way, people aren't swerving opportunities, everyone is trying to do it together," Hunter Bell said.
Hunter Bell agreed that the leading women 800m runners were like prizefighters, who believed they could beat anyone. "But there's respect too," she said. "Obviously you want to win. If you are in the same race, everyone runs really fast, whoever comes out on top, that's fun. We'll see how it goes."