I Don't Feel Like Dancin' - Scissor Sisters
My now-husband and I attended a wedding. The reception was boring. No one was dancing and people were wondering if it was too early to leave. We sat at our table thinking what song would get everyone up on to the dancefloor. We chose I Don't Feel Like Dancin'. When I asked the DJ to play it he laughed and said: "That's appropriate." We danced by ourselves and people started joining us. The party kicked off and we all had a great time. Years later, we played the song at our own wedding. It makes me happy. Rachael, 46, Warrington
Celebrity Skin - Hole
I used to go to rock clubs in the early 2000s and this was the only song they'd play with a female vocalist. Me and my friend danced like maniacs, forcing the guys off the dancefloor. Heather, London
Return of the Mack - Mark Morrison
It's a guilty pleasure for sure, but Return of the Mack always gets me out there. It has been a favourite of mine and my twin brother's since we first heard it. The melody transcends the cheese and lyrics to make it a booty bopper I can't resist. The last time my brother and I were back home at a very stodgy bar, this surprisingly came on and we immediately transformed the bar into our dancefloor. Some others actually followed. Music truly does transcend all. Dave, 56, Portland, US
I Bet You Look Good on the Dancefloor - Arctic Monkeys
It's a song that I've grown up with and was a staple at the nightclub Welly in Hull that I used to go to when I was in sixth form and university. It was the first song I put down when my wife and I were choosing our wedding evening playlist. It's timeless. Chris Brough, 31, York
Temptation - New Order
An extremely danceable classic from an iconic band, which is guaranteed to get everybody up and moving. Calle Jershed, 55, Gothenburg, Sweden
Rock Lobster - The B-52s
This is the one that always gets me up, wherever I am. It's like I was hypnotised way back when I first heard it - I always immediately spring up from my seat when it's on. Julie Gibson, 61, Northamptonshire
I Believe in Miracles - The Jackson Sisters
It's soulful, funky and utterly hypnotic - the song grabs me instantly. Bernd Wagner, Mainz, Germany
Groove Is in the Heart - Deee-Lite
It is still sensational, and so inventive. It pops and crackles along at a rollicking pace, Lady Miss Kier's vocals give way to insane drum breaks, and it never grows old. It's funky as hell and just wonderful. Alex, 52, Southampton
Last Dance - Donna Summer
When I was a college student in the 70s, I loved going to discos. This is such a joyful song. To this day, when I hear it I cannot sit still. Terry Heimbaugh, 70, Illinois, US
Sex & Drugs & Rock & Roll - Ian Dury
Opening with an ambitious drum roll, it moves instantly into a killer riff. This song combines whimsical lyrics with tightly executed funk that's an absolute joy to dance to. Kate, East Cambridgeshire
Blinding Lights - The Weeknd
My taste is eclectic, but rarely includes songs that chart. This is a gorgeous exception. The composition is so simple but it's combined into something so full and rich. Immediately I'm dancing. Jack, 32, Bristol
Man 2 Man Meets Man Parrish - Male Stripper
This song will always get me on the dancefloor. It's so catchy and the opening few bars are so distinctive that it puts a massive smile on my face. Tim, 60, Prestwick
Butter - BTS
Butter has a great beat and has also helped me introduce more people to the world of K-pop. It holds great memories for me, of connecting to other people when I was feeling low. This song just has a way of bringing people together, no matter what genre they like. Gwen, Sydney, Australia
Rocks - Primal Scream
Yes, it's a Rolling Stones rip-off but it is pure adrenaline and rock'n'roll euphoria. Dave Ross, Glasgow
California Love - 2Pac ft Dr Dre
As soon as I hear those first few notes, my hips can't help but move. 2Pac's "shake it, shake it, baby" is a command I cannot deny. Something about this song reminds me of being 18, hitting the dancefloor and being carefree. Rachael, 39, Sydney, Australia
Do I Love You (Indeed I Do) - Frank Wilson
I have always loved Northern soul and Do I Love You (Indeed I Do) is the song which always gets me dancing. I will often request it at wedding functions. It brings back memories of a bygone age, growing up in a deprived area where music was a way of gathering together at the local youth club. Julie, 68, Shropshire
Brimful of Asha - Cornershop
When I hear it, I absolutely can't stay still, no matter how knackered I am. And I can listen to it time after time and not get sick of it. Barbara Manighetti, 65, Wellington, New Zealand
Move on Up - Curtis Mayfield
It's the greatest song ever written in my opinion - it has just four main chords, but it's so uplifting. Michael, 43, Madrid, Spain
Jump Around - House of Pain
The distinctive horn at the beginning is like a calling, and then the hip-hop beat starts, and you're already a goner within the first few seconds. There's something about the track: not only do you jump, but you also want to shout out the chorus on the dancefloor. It's a 90s banger with attitude. Sofia Ilyas, 45, London
Ice Ice Baby - Vanilla Ice
I remember my two sisters and I dancing to this song when it played on MTV back in the 90s. We would jump around the living room. I still listen to it now, dancing around the house with my dogs watching curiously. It triggers a happiness switch in my mind. Lara, 39, Bengaluru, India
Let Me Be Your Fantasy - Baby D
I only have to hear the whisper of "Let me be your fantasy" at the beginning and I'll be on the floor dragging anyone in my path. This track is such a mood booster. Debbie, 51, London
Mr Brightside - The Killers
It was once played at a friend's wedding - I maniacally jumped up and down on the dancefloor and the bride audibly guffawed. Neil Vicker, 63, Newbury