Some last-gasp breaking news, and it's not good for Everton fans - the move for Monaco forward Folarin Balogun is off (unless, of course, a certain satsuma-hued powerbroker decides to step in). Andy Hunter has more ...
Time to call it a night. Here are the day's big stories - and keep following our interactive guide for every last deal before we take our ball home until 1 January.
Late moves aplenty still going through, with Zian Flemming joining Ipswich for £20m, and Hull City making their sixth deadline-day signing in the shape of Greek midfielder Christos Mouzakitis. Follow along with our transfer interactive ...
More on Enzo Fernández's arrival at the Etihad, via an official statement.
Manchester City have completed the signing of Enzo Fernández from Chelsea on a five-year contract. The Argentina international's deal means he will remain at the Etihad Stadium until the summer of 2031.
Fernández says he could not be happier to have joined City at this stage of his career. "Manchester City are the most successful club in England in recent times. Every player wants to be part of a club like this because everyone knows how well-run City are.
"I could not be happier to be here, and I am ready for the challenge of helping City continue winning trophies. This is a club built for success," Fernández added. "If you look across the squad, City have quality in every area. I want to learn from my new teammates and become a better player.
"I pride myself on continually improving my game. Anyone who's worked with me will know how hard I train every single day and how much I put into matches. I give absolutely everything and I can promise Manchester City that will continue now I'm here.
City's director of football, Hugo Viana, added: "At Manchester City, we are always looking to bring in world-class players and Enzo fits the bill. He is a complete midfielder: technically gifted, hardworking, tenacious and a goalscorer.
"He is adept at playing different styles of football. He is comfortable playing a possession-based game, and he can play on the counter effectively, too. We are delighted to bring him here and feel very strongly he will improve our team."
It's the biggest transfer fee of the window, and now it's official: Manchester City have signed Chelsea midfielder Enzo Fernández for a club-record £125m.
You wait 17 years for a Spurs-Chelsea transfer deal, and two come along in one evening. After agreeing a loan move for Mykhailo Mudryk earlier, Tottenham have signed Chelsea centre-back Tosin Adarabioyo for around £7m.
According to Sky Sports, there are at least six deal sheets in the Premier League's inbox, with three of those coming from Selhurst Park, as Ed Aarons reports below. There's also Folarin Balogun's Everton move and Malick Fofana on his way to Sunderland; the other deal sheet comes from Leeds, for Eintracht Frankfurt winger Jean-Matteo Bahoya.
Chelsea's move for Lamine Camara collapsed after Everton's move for Monaco's Folarin Balogun was revived. Balogun's move looked in doubt after complications with his medical, meaning Monaco needed funds from elsewhere, leaving Chelsea to swoop for Camara as a replacement for Enzo Fernández before his move to Manchester City.
However Everton have persisted and renegotiating their fee for Balogun led to Monaco pulling out of the Camara deal. Chelsea are livid, with sources calling Monaco's behaviour deeply unprofessional. Chelsea had a written agreement with the Ligue 1 side. It's important to add this development won't scupper the Fernández deal to City.
Crystal Palace have submitted deal sheets for Ben Chilwell, Dario Osario and Quinten Timber after dramatically missing out Malick Fofana earlier. Pierre Sage wanted to bring in more reinforcements ahead of a season that will see Palace play in the Europa League. Chilwell will replace Borna Sosa as cover for Tyrick Mitchell after the Croatia defender joined Köln on loan.
Palace turned to Osario - the Chile winger who plays for Midtjylland in Denmark - after Fofana opted to join Sunderland. They have also revived a move for Netherlands midfielder Timber (the twin brother of Arsenal's Jurriën) from Marseille after failing to agree a fee for Mainz's Kaishu Sano earlier in the day.
Lamine Camara's move to Chelsea is OFF, Jacob Steinberg confirms. It looked like the Monaco midfielder was set to complete a £47m move, but that won't be happening. Enzo Fernández's move to Manchester City is not affected by the Camara deal.
Here's the first mention of a deal sheet, in relation to Everton and their pursuit of Folarin Balogun, who could probably live without any more admin drama.
"Everton have submitted a deal sheet to complete the Balogun deal after trying to renegotiate the structure of the fee with Monaco. Maitland-Niles deal expected to go through," reports Andy Hunter.
Enzo Fernandez has penned a -long - heartfelt message to Chelsea fans after his £125m move to Man City.
Want to read it?
Dear Chelsea.
I want you to know that these have not been easy days for me. Writing this is not easy either. The truth is, I haven't been in a good place.
Three years ago, Cobham and Stamford Bridge became home for me and my family. I grew attached to the people, to the shirt, and to the badge of this incredible club.
Believe me when I say that, from the moment I arrived, I became obsessed with winning and with bringing this club every trophy that its history deserves. We suffered, we cried, I got angry many times, but we also celebrated titles and unforgettable victories. Together, through the good times and the difficult ones.
I live football the same way I live my life: with passion and with all my heart. That is why I want you to know that I understand you. I truly understand you, from the bottom of my heart.
But life is about making decisions, and right now I find myself having to make one of those difficult decisions. I've said it before, but I want to say it again: I have grown incredibly fond of this club. Chelsea will always have a place in my thoughts and, above all, in my heart.
But I also understand how football works. I know how passionate you are, because I am the same. And if I were in your position, I would probably be thinking the same way.
I want to thank every single one of you: the staff, the coaching team, the medical team, the physios, and everyone who works at Cobham and throughout this great institution.
To all my teammates over these years, thank you from the bottom of my heart for sharing so many moments with me. I was truly happy here, and I wish you nothing but the very best for the future.
Thank you for all the love and support you have given me and my family throughout these years. I will never forget it.
This group will give you many more reasons to be happy, and I will be happy for you too. Never doubt that.
You will always be in my heart, Blues. I will always wish you, always, nothing but the very best.
Drew is copping quite a lot of heat from fellow Arsenal fans behind the scenes.
I can't share them all but let's just say he doesn't speak for all Gooners.
And as Rory Hoare points out, things could be worse than winning the league:
All my thoughts are with you Drew. As a spurs fan I cannot imagine the pain of winning the league, selling a couple of players and still looking like you'll win the league again. You poor lamb.
Understand Everton's offer for Joshua Zirkzee was in the region of £10m for the loan of the Manchester United forward and to cover his wages for the season - and Utd felt this was too low.
Drew Lundgren [great name by the way] is back for some more Arsenal ranting:
I dont think you can call Arsenal favorites with their turgid attack (turgid for YEARS now), and their front office spiraling out of control, ready to close the window with 2 fewer attackers than last year. They are 1 injury away Arteta dressing as back up striker.
Will there a be a deal secured that future generations look back on with awe? Will you, our dear reader, tell your grandkids that you were here, on our blog, to read all about it?
"Am told Joshua Zirkzee's proposed loan to Everton from Manchester United fell down because it was too late for United to source a replacement; United, it is understood, believe the Dutch forward can still contribute."
A couple of disgruntled Arsenal fans have written in.
Drew Lundgren:
Arsenal deadline day appears to be a failure. There is no imaginable reason to let Martinelli go with no replacement. The fans at the Emirates really need to get on the manager and Berta next time out. Chants, boos, they really need to let them know. It is a completely pathetic showing. Berta out.
Gary Stover:
Stan Knoenke not only owns Arsenal FC and the Los Angeles Rams, and is now buying the Los Angeles Angels MLB team, and through his wife, a descendant of Sam Walton (Walmart), they own the Denver Nuggets NBA franchise, the MLS Colorado Rapids, the NHL Colorado Avalanche.... Kroenke spearheaded the attempt to establish the European Super League. All of this doesn't make him a bad guy. He's simply using his money to buy and make money through ownership of sports franchises. He's not alone. In this environment who's to say how much an individual player is worth? or a team? If you have enough money to own a sports franchise, you have enough money to hire attorneys, who'll find a way around the "rules." One thing is certain--Man City is not worried about being in violation of anything anytime.
One signing Everton have got over the line is Jack Grealish, who has returned to the Hill Dickinson Stadium on another season loan from Manchester City.
The 30-year-old was enjoying a productive spell on loan last season before suffering a fractured foot that ended his campaign in February.
Grealish, who will be out of contract at City when this latest deal ends next summer, could make his second Everton 'debut' against Manchester United on Sunday.
He said: "I'm so happy. I think I'm at my best at everything in life, not just football, when I feel loved. That's what the manager has given me, what my teammates have given me and especially what the fans have given me. Every time I see an Everton fan, it's just pure love.
"It means a lot to me and hopefully I've made a few Everton fans happy. I had a perfect time here for the first six months, then I stayed around after I got injured. I've been watching all the Everton games in pre-season and since the season started. Now I feel ready to go."
Phew. What a hectic couple of minutes. Jamie, Ed, Jacob and David are motoring! Well done lads!
In the last few minutes we've had Tottenham land Mudryk on a loan deal from Chelsea, Everton failed to secure Zirkzee from Man United and Chelsea are waiting on Camara's medical.
Tottenham have announced the loan signing of Mischa Mudryk from Chelsea. They have a £75m option to buy the Ukraine winger. I hope it works out for Mudryk.
Just to add in the medical for Camara is already done. So we're just waiting for confirmation.
A crazy situation as Chelsea had bids rejected for him - then the breakdown of Everton's move for Folarin Balogun left Monaco needing another source of funds
Spurs pivoted to Ukraine international Mudryk on Monday after a dramatic finale to a remarkable summer transfer window for the north London club.
After no progress in a pursuit for Liverpool's Cody Gakpo, Tottenham reached an agreement in principle with Everton for Iliman Ndiaye on Sunday before Manchester City, having also missed out on Gakpo, hijacked the deal, forcing De Zerbi to turn to Mudryk.
Mudryk returned from a 20-month suspension last month and worked with De Zerbi at Shakhtar Donetsk before a transfer to Chelsea in 2023.
It has been a difficult time for the 25-year-old after he was banned in 2024 by the Football Association due to an "adverse finding" for meldonium. However, Mudryk will aim to rediscover his best form under De Zerbi on a season-long loan that includes a £75m option to buy.
Speaking during Tottenham's pre-season tour of Australia when Mudryk's ban ended, De Zerbi said: "He's my son. I'm very happy. He deserves to play. He's a cool guy, a top player. Hopefully he can show what he suffered in the last two years in this next season. Press Association.
Tim Iroegbunam has left Everton to join Hull City. The fee for the 23-year-old is undisclosed but is believed to be worth £15m plus £7m in add-ons, with Aston Villa receiving a sell-on sum as part of the deal that took the midfielder to Merseyside in 2024.
Getting word that Sunderland have won the mad race for Malik Fofana's signature.
The Black Cats had the deal wrapped up this morning - worth a reported £25.7m - but a faulty plane and some chutzpah from Crystal Palace, who tried to hijack the move, added some drama to the narrative.
Crystal Palace are set to sign Ben Chilwell for an undisclosed fee from Strasbourg as they continue to work right up until the deadline.
The former England defender spent the second half of last season at Selhurst Park on loan and is now on his way back to London, where he spent five years with Chelsea.
Palace are still trying to do deals for midfielder Quinten Timber from Marseille and a loan for Chile forward Darío Osorio from Danish side Midtjylland after apparently accepting defeat to Sunderland in their attempts to sign Malick Fofana from Lyon.
Everton have not pulled the plug on a deal for Folarin Balogun yet, despite problems with the US international's medical and making a loan move for Manchester United's Joshua Zirkzee. Still a chance the Balogun deal goes through.
Here's more on United's late effort to secure a leftback:
Am told Rayan Aït-Nouri was offered to Manchester United by his camp a few days ago - the club contacted City this afternoon and were told only a loan with obligation to buy was possible, which United baulked at.
Chelsea have agreed a £47m deal to sign Lamine Camara from Monaco.
The 22-year-old from Senegal joined Monaco from Metz in 2024 and has quickly established himself as one of Ligue 1's most dynamic midfielders.
Comfortable as a No 6 or No 8, he brings energy, ball-winning and progressive passing, while possessing a fierce shot and a reputation for dangerous set-pieces.
Evening Niall. The transfer window doesn't close slam shut until Thursday in Scotland, so still plenty time for rumours and actual deals up here. With Vicko Sevelj having left Tannadice for Azerbaijan outfit Neftci Baku, Dundee United have moved to secure Lyall Cameron on loan from Rangers and are looking at Josh Campbell of Hibs too. Celtic have taken Parma midfielder Oliver Sorenson on loan, and Portland Timbers striker Kevin Kelsy appears set to sign for Rangers. On Thursday, expect Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo to be spotted in Glasgow...
Manchester City have completed the signing of Iliman Nidaye for a fee that could rise to £65m. The Senegal international had three years remaining on his Everton contract and had scored 17 goals in 74 appearances for the club.
David Moyes said just over a week ago that it would take "an absolutely outrageous bid" for Everton to sell their prized asset yet the club's hierarchy, conscious of squad ratio cost pressures, have let him go for less than what City sold Savinho for.
With Beto gone and doubts emerging over Folarin Balogun's medical results, Ndiaye's exit could leave Everton in a very precarious position.
Manchester City have confirmed the signing of Iliman Ndiaye from Everton for £60m plus £5m, the 26-year-old signing a five-year contract.
The wide forward said: "City are one of the best clubs in the world and I've seen them win everything as I've grown up. To be able to write my own chapter in a story that special is the chance of a lifetime and I'm determined to grab it with both hands. It's not always been easy in my career, but I always had the belief that I could play for a team challenging for the biggest prizes and now I'm here. It feels so good. I love to play with the ball on the floor in an attacking team that wants to score as many goals as possible. That's why I know this is the perfect fit."
Ndiaye was loaned from Sheffield United, his first club, to Hyde United for the second half of the 2019-20 season and has also played for Marseille.
Thanks Niall. Phew, things are hotting up. Especially in the two-club race to sign Malik Fofana.
As Louise Taylor says:
Sunderland's owner, Kyril Louis-Dreyfus has flown to Lyon to try to persuade Malick Fofana to join Lyon rather than Crystal Palace and there is a sense Sunderland have won the race for his signature after the winger underwent a medical in France commissioned by both the north east club and Crystal Palace.
Sunderland, meanwhile, are hoping to sign a second winger in Benfica's Dodi Lukebakio before the deadline.
A big deal is now officially done: Manchester City have signed Everton forward Iliman Ndiaye in a transfer worth a reported £65m in total - £60m up front and £5m in add-ons.
"Manchester City is delighted to announce the signing of Iliman Ndiaye from Everton," an official statement said. "The 26-year-old forward has signed a five-year contract, keeping him at the Etihad Stadium until the summer of 2031."
Manchester United made a late enquiry to Manchester City for their left-back Rayan Aït-Nouri, but the 25-year-old will not be leaving. This seems a little late, and a scattergun approach from United.
"Why does Malick Fofana need to come to England at all tonight?" asks Iain Chambers. "Can't he just sign a contract of whichever club he eventually chooses, pop home for a kip, and make an early morning start on packing up his PlayStation & some autumn clothing choices?"
Yes, it's one of those old-fashioned curiosities of the transfer deadline that players must be whisked off to sign the paperwork in an empty stadium, when the whole thing could have been a Zoom call.
More on Malick Fofana's plane dilemma - Ed Aarons reports that "Palace manager Pierre Sage has also spoken to the 21-year-old on the phone again this evening, having made contact earlier on today. The pair previously worked together at Lyon." Presumably, Sage talked up Croydon's excellent transport links with Gatwick and central London.
Any Arsenal fans awaiting transfer updates: how about an entire baseball team? Stan Kroenke, owner of the Premier League champions and the NFL's LA Rams, is poised to buy the MLB's Los Angeles Angels, who are based in Anaheim.
There's a striker merry-go-round on the continent; with Nick Woltemade joining Juve on loan, Jonathan David has left Turin for Madrid, signing for Atlético on an initial loan. Júlian Alvarez, meanwhile, is still an Atleti player with the clock running down.
Everton's pursuit of Folarin Balogun has left Beto surplus to requirements, so he's off to Fiorentina for €18m - with former Everton forward Moise Kean joining Como on loan. Another man leaving Florence is Albert Gudmundsson, who moves to Lazio, freeing up Boulaye Dia to join Ligue 1's Rennes on loan. Keeping up with all that? Good.
"The Malick Fofana tarmac tension is really something else. Let's face it, it might come down to which of the two planes is nicer," writes Peter Oh. Sky are reporting that Sunderland chairman Kyril Louis-Dreyfus is on the ground in Lyon, trying to persuade Fofana to choose his side. Palace need to bring out the big guns - Ikea, Boxpark etc.