The first song I fell in love with
My dad gave me California Dreamin' by the Mamas & the Papas on vinyl for my fifth birthday. I said: "Oh thanks, Dad," but really, I thought: "Who is this weird bunch of people?" Obviously, the present was really for him.
The first single I bought
I remember begging my mum to buy me Beat It by Michael Jackson at a record shop in the 'burbs of Sydney. I mean - he's Michael Jackson.
The song I do at karaoke
When you're a singer, it's really awkward: you don't want to throw a tantrum, sound too good or show off, because then everyone is like "Ugh." I might do Torn, but only at parties, when I'm drunk and my friends make me.
The song I inexplicably know every lyric to
You're the Voice by John Farnham - because it's a bit of a tour bus anthem after a show and a couple of gins.
The song I can no longer listen to
When I was 17, this guy wrote out the lyrics to Coyote by Joni Mitchell and told me he'd written a poem about me. I thought: "My God, he's a poet." But years later, I was listening to this album and thought: "I recognise those words!" So now I just think: "What a creep!"
The best song to play at a party
Any time it's afters at mine, I always think: "What am I gonna put on?" I'm not the most confident party playlist DJ. But, no matter the mood or the crowd, I can put on Genius of Love by Tom Tom Club, and everyone loves it.
The best song to have sex to
Pass! Have I tried my own music? God, no!
The song that changed my life
I have to say Torn, don't I? Even though it's a cover, which I've been tortured over ever since. People say: "You didn't write Torn." I think: "So what? I know I didn't." There was a meme that said: "The way you feel when you find out Torn's a cover," and it all started again! I thought: "For fuck's sake, I just got over that!"
The song that gets me up in the morning
I'm not good in the mornings, so it has to be something gentle, like Little Blue by Jacob Collier.
The song that makes me cry
A Song for You by Donny Hathaway is just the most incredible love song. The tone of his voice is so pleasing.
The song I'd like played at my funeral
Another One Bites the Dust by Queen, segued into Don't Stop Me Now.
Natalie Imbruglia's album Algorithm is out on 4 September.