Disney+ has been criticised by viewers after an advert break interrupted the second half of Tuesday's live television coverage of Arsenal's opening Women's Champions League fixture.
Fans were unable to see the action for about three minutes, with some 15 minutes remaining, during Arsenal's 1-0 victory over the Danish side HB Køge.
Some viewers saw the adverts, while others were presented with the words "commercial break in progress" on an orange backdrop.
Once match coverage resumed, the commentary team continued without commenting on the disruption, seemingly unaware it had happened. No goals were missed and Arsenal scored the winner through Mariona Caldentey's 93rd-minute penalty.
Disney+ has been approached for comment.
The streaming platform's Women's Champions League coverage is produced by ESPN. Many fans vented frustration on social media during and after the advert break, and some received replies from the Disney+ Help account on X, which wrote to one fan, Emelia: "Sorry for any frustration, Emelia! Our Disney+ Standard and Disney+ Premium plans are without commercial interruption, but these plans may include limited promotional content including clips and trailers, as well as branded content or programme sponsor messaging. Live and special events may also have ads."
However, it is understood Tuesday's interruption was unintended and was caused by a technical issue, which Disney+ is understood to be taking steps to address.
In 2025, Disney+ secured a five-year deal to broadcast the competition exclusively across Europe, including to viewers in the United Kingdom, replacing the previous rights holders, Dazn.
The streaming platform's coverage also drew criticism from some fans for the unusually quirky nature of its analysis show, which included the presence of a dog in the studio and a quiz about Italy, including a question about pasta. A new show called The Hangout, which aired live from 5pm until 10.30pm BST to cover the 5.45pm and 8pm kick-offs, also included guests enjoying a vegetable platter while discussing the games.
The broadcaster Flo Lloyd-Hughes wrote on X: "Disney's new UWCL coverage is the closest we've seen to CBBC football (derogatory). I wouldn't be surprised if we see someone gunged for making a wrong prediction or perhaps Raven will make a cameo. Keep stopping to remind myself this isn't a dream."
It is understood Disney intends to listen to audience feedback regarding The Hangout as the season progresses.