'So vibrant and full of life'
This summer has been so vibrant and full of life. I had my doubts but, as the World Cup approached and Boston got ready to host its first game, I started feeling the excitement and enthusiasm in the air. That mainly had to do with the huge numbers of Scottish fans who arrived for their match against Haiti. They were a delight, what with their shenanigans of putting cones everywhere, walking around in kilts and carrying bagpipes, jamming with the other buskers on the streets. They were such a fun bunch. I found myself getting hooked. Seeing people from so many different countries, kitted out in their jerseys, gave you the feeling that something was happening. Friends and colleagues who don't follow the sport were as excited as me. I attended three games and my only complaint is the extremely expensive ticket prices. The fans who came only had wonderful things to say about American hospitality - but everyone agreed that the political situation in the country is terrible. It was heartening that the visiting fans were able to separate the administration from the people living here. Moon, Boston
'We sent out a message'
The mood was a bit sombre before the World Cup, with store owners complaining Fifa had locked them out and people downbeat about the incredibly high ticket prices. But once it started the cognitive dissonance did not stop people from going to the many watch parties in town, which were filled with fun and joy. We were priced out of the real thing but the party still went on, preferably without Fifa. In spite of everything done by Fifa, we sent out the message that people, and not institutions, own football. As for highlights, the incredible celebrations after Colombia beat DR Congo - which extended for hours after the game, well into the night, going on for blocks and blocks - will stay with me. I don't think the city had ever felt more Colombian. Yes, and Merlin the duck. Eme Guitron, Guadalajara
'We saw the best of Canada'
The first week set the tone: the notoriously fickle Vancouver weather was perfect, the pedestrianisation of Granville Street was a roaring success and it seemed as if everyone bought into the experience. I attended Egypt v New Zealand and it was a real bucket-list moment. It was a flawless experience from start to finish: public transport ran like a dream, the atmosphere at the fan parks and stadium was incredible, and it was a great game. I even managed to win a correct score bet! People really welcomed the world. They say "Canadians are born all over the world" and it was wonderful to see the various diasporas bring their colour and energy to watching the games on the big screens. We saw the best of Canada at the tournament: beautiful and welcoming. I have been banging the drum for Vancouver to friends and family for years. After seeing just how fantastic this city is, hopefully the rest of the world will travel here too. I will never forget watching my son open his first ever pack of Panini football stickers on the eve of the first game. Ben Lane, Vancouver
'The host cities were way too spread out'
I lived in South Africa when it hosted the World Cup in 2010. Fans were based in Johannesburg or Cape Town, with the World Cup central to everything for five weeks. You could feel it throughout the country. But this time the host cities were way too spread out. I was in DC, New York, Chicago and Atlanta during this tournament - two host cities and two cities that could have hosted. Unless you purposefully put yourself into a football-watching location, nothing seemed to be different than a random Tuesday. Kyle, New York
'I am glad it's all over'
It seems like people had a good time. Roads and transit were a bit of a mess and we are not used to seeing people lined up at bars and pubs at 9am - there was a shortage of beer. Vancouver hosted the Winter Olympics a while back and it had the same vibe. I personally am glad it is over. I want my boring city back, please. Eleanor, Vancouver
'The Mexican fans were wonderful'
I attended several matches during the 1986 World Cup but it was impossible this year because of the high prices. The mood was amazing in the city, though, with people enjoying matches in restaurants, bars, public squares, fanfests and stadiums. The Mexican fans were wonderful and gave a good impression to the world. My partner is English and we have two sons who love football, so the best moment was enjoying the Mexico v England match together in Mexico City. Oliver Regueiro, Mexico City
'A surprising success'
We went to a fanfest in Philadelphia but did not attend any games because we ain't ballin' like that. Not even my eldest brother - who attended the World Cup in South Korea and Olympic football matches in China - was willing to pony up for those outrageously inflated ticket prices. Despite the shenanigans of Fifa and Donald Trump, the World Cup was a surprising success. We've loved having all the international fans as well as seeing our own varied populace rooting for ancestral lands. People still think our elected leader is a feckless monster - they aren't wrong - but now they remember it can be a lovely place to visit. The camaraderie and exuberance shown by fans - especially from Norway, Scotland and Japan - reminds us all of the best of humanity. W Pfeister, Louisiana
'I had talked about boycotting'
The atmosphere in the buildup to the tournament was coloured with cynicism: about high ticket prices, Fifa's disregard for fans, and a queasiness about Gianni Infantino's eagerness to cosy up to the Trump administration. Co-hosting with them? We felt like we needed a shower. Of course, as is always the way, when the tournament started the cynicism had to compete with genuine enthusiasm for the fantastic football, the Cinderella stories, and the sheer thrill of hosting the world. I had talked a good game about boycotting as I loathe Fifa with the heat of a thousand suns, but my friends and family persuaded me I would regret not going to some games. So I caved and attended two matches, which both had a great vibe. The atmosphere in Vancouver was superb. The buzz going into the stadium was terrific and everything was extremely well organised. The host cities and fans did a hell of a job. Respect where it's due. Allan Castle, Vancouver
'A success and an embarrassment'
On one level the World Cup was a success and on another level it was an embarrassment. A success because it brought the world's game to a level of national attention that is refreshing - much like the Olympics. On another level, it put on display the dysfunction of the US government: referees denied visas, teams forced to train in Mexico, and ugly politics between our president and Fifa president. I hope the trilateral hosting is repeated in future minus the embarrassing egotistical displays. Wayne H Donner, New York
'The city came alive'
The mood was vibrant. We haven't seen the city come alive quite like this in a number of years. Toronto did not get many matches but, given it is so multicultural, every game felt like a home game for the teams playing. Most people bought into the event. Also, having to host meant the city finally made progress around things such as transit and essential roadworks. Maybe we should host things more often. I was surprised at just how many fans came to our city, some of their marches to the stadium were genuinely impressive, especially for the Portugal v Croatia game. Canada is not just a hockey country; this World Cup has proven that definitively and I can't wait to see how the tournament will change the game here. Prem, Toronto
'I cannot get enough of those bagpipes'
Everyone has been positive about our foreign guests, and we are glad they had a good time. Our guests have behaved with exquisite politeness even while partying with great enthusiasm. A friend of mine went to a game in Atlanta and said it was the greatest experience of her life. Many people who generally do not pay attention to sports (including myself) have been glued to the TV watching the matches. I believe the tournament will leave a legacy of US cities being able to host these large events in a manner that delights our guests. Hopefully, the world will see us in a more positive light. The highlights were watching our foreign guests partying in our cities, enjoying our food, and generally enjoying the American experience. Also, watching the Scots march through the streets of Boston was very exciting. I cannot get enough of those bagpipes! They are what got me interested and made me start watching. Anne Landrum, Atlanta
'It was purely a party'
I was lucky to go to five games and the fan excitement will stay with me for ever. Being able to see Canada play in my home town in the World Cup (and win) was something I never thought I'd be able to say. I want people who watched the games in Vancouver to have a favourable view of my city, and I think the way it was executed will do that. I want people to think of Canada as a country where everyone is welcome and celebrated. We are a country of immigrants and we are stronger because of it. Populism and xenophobia seem to be on the rise across the world, so seeing people from all over take such joy in watching their team was beautiful. There was never hate for the opposing team; there was never hate for another country or its people; and there was no bragging about how one person's country is better than the rest. It was purely a party. Jayden, Vancouver
'We have been one again'
It was great. Our country has been divided (like the rest of the world) for political reasons for a long time. During the last six weeks we have been one again: one country, one team! We regained that sense of great hospitality we had lost due to nasty violence and headlines about drug gangs. I did not hear about a single incident around the games. I will not forget singing the national anthem during the opening ceremony with my family. Rogelio Torres, Mexico City
'I've never seen anything close to it'
I was surprised at the level of interest. It always peaks when US teams make runs at World Cups, but nothing like this year. Everyone I know followed intently. I was fortunate enough to attend several matches, including US games in Santa Clara, LA and Seattle. It was an absolutely electric atmosphere in the stadiums; I've never seen anything close to it at US matches previously. Seattle was especially jaw-dropping given the noise, the whole stadium being on their feet for the entire match, and the weirdly appropriate use of Country Roads. With the stadium adjacent to the city centre, the atmosphere spilled on to the streets in a way the suburban stadiums can't equal. Allan Timpe, California
'Some cities did a better job than others'
I left my home state of Massachusetts to follow my team, Egypt, during the tournament. Some cities did a better job than others and it was noticeable how much the vibe was different when the stadium was downtown compared with when it was outside the city. In Dallas and Boston, you couldn't really tell there was a World Cup; in Seattle, Vancouver and Atlanta, you couldn't escape it. Overall, considering the barrage of negativity that rightly surrounded the tournament before it started, it has exceeded my expectations. I just wish more games were played in Canada and Mexico. Omar Aly, Boston