Arsenal
For once, Mikel Arteta is not spending his summer looking for a No 9. Instead the champions have moved to strengthen out wide after the departure of Leandro Trossard with Christos Tzolis arriving for £34m having scored 33 league goals in his last two seasons from Club Brugge's left wing. After missing out on Morgan Rogers to Chelsea, they will not want to be beaten to Alex Scott's signature. Defensive cover will probably be necessary after the injury to William Saliba at the World Cup. Billy Munday
Major ins Piero Hincapié (Bayer Leverkusen, £45m, after loan), Christos Tzolis (Club Brugge, £34m) Major outs Leandro Trossard (Besiktas, £15.3m), Jakub Kiwior (Porto, £14.5m)
Aston Villa
It is a very busy summer of comings and goings at Villa Park. Alejandro Garnacho is primed to swap places with Morgan Rogers and there is still scope for Emiliano Martínez to leave, forcing their hand in goal, and Arsenal's interest in Ezri Konsa is not going away. Striker is another position without guarantees, with Nicolas Jackson one option, especially if Fenerbahce's interest in Ollie Watkins becomes something more concrete. A left-back to replace the departing Lucas Digne is a must, while Leon Bailey is available for transfer and could head to Hull. Will Unwin
Major ins Johan Manzambi (Freiburg, £51m), João Gomes (Wolves, £34m) Major outs Morgan Rogers (Chelsea, £117m), Youri Tielemans (Manchester United, £35m), Donyell Malen (Roma, £21.6m)
Bournemouth
Plenty will depend on Alex Scott and whether he stays or goes, with interest in the midfielder, who has turned down a new contract, from Chelsea, Manchester United and Arsenal. Regardless of that, Benfica's António Silva is lined up to replace Marcos Senesi, while the search is continuing for a right-back. With a first season in the Europa League ahead, planning accordingly to ensure the squad is sufficiently robust to cope with a more hectic schedule than usual is paramount. WU
Major ins Álvaro Rodríguez (Elche, £21.4m) Major outs Luis Sinisterra (Cruzeiro, £5.2m), Marcos Senesi (Tottenham, free)
Brentford
Usually a big sale pushes the Bees into action but not this summer. Experience has been on the agenda, with Jaidon Anthony and Callum Wilson acquired, while the arrival of the young centre-back Jannik Schuster could mean the end of Ethan Pinnock's time with the club. They are, as always, likely to look at bringing in players with potential. The Manchester United teenager Noah Ajayi falls into this category but whether a deal progresses remains to be seen. WU
Major ins Jaidon Anthony (Burnley, £15m), Jannik Schuster (Red Bull Salzburg, £14m), Callum Wilson (West Ham, free)
Brighton
Investing in the defence early has freed up time to do other critical business, with a central midfield refresh potentially in the offing, while there is a desire to bolster the winger bullpen. Evan Ferguson is back at the club after a loan spell at Roma but whether he has a future at the club remains to be seen. If not, finding suitable support for the 35-year-old Danny Welbeck will be part of the strategy with the a Conference League campaign awaiting. Bart Verbruggen has attracted interest in Europe and a departure would call for a new No 1 to be found. WU
Major ins Luka Vuskovic (Tottenham, £46m), Zadok Yohanna (AIK, £21.5m), Pascal Struijk (Leeds United, £18m), Costinha (Olympiakos, 11m) Major outs Jan Paul van Hecke (Tottenham, £52m), Diego Coppola (Paris FC, £15.3m), James Milner (retired), Solly March (released)
Chelsea
Marc Cucurella's sale has left a hole to fill at left-back. Options there include a return for Newcastle's Lewis Hall or a move for Rayo Vallecano's Pep Chavarría. The midfield is also looking light with Andrey Santos out the door and Enzo Fernández linked with a move away. The reluctance to sign a goalkeeper suggests 20-year-old Mike Penders is not far from competing for the No 1 spot. The capture of Morgan Rogers will excite supporters, but they still crave a top centre-back and striker. BM
Major ins Morgan Rogers (Aston Villa, £117m), Marco Palestra (Atalanta, £47m), Geovany Quenda (Sporting, £40m), Emmanuel Emegha (Strasbourg, £21.6m) Major outs Marc Cucurella (Real Madrid, £52m), Andrey Santos (Manchester United, £50m), Tyrique George (Everton, £18m)
Coventry
Without putting too fine a point on it, quality across the board is required. The club are still working on bringing the Brighton goalkeeper Carl Rushworth back after a successful loan in the Championship but price and competition for his signature will complicate matters. Finding strikers capable of converting chances will be integral to their chances of survival for Frank Lampard's side. Norman Bassette has returned to Belgium after spending last season out of loan. WU
Major ins Loum Tchaouna (Burnley, £20m), Aurèle Amenda (Eintracht Frankfurt, £15.4m), Frank Onyeka (Brentford, undisclosed fee)
Crystal Palace
Making sure Maxence Lacroix, Jean-Philippe Mateta and Adam Wharton are still at the club come kick-off is imperative. Chelsea's interest in Lacroix and Wharton will cause the most concern, while extending Mateta's deal beyond the end of the season will need to be addressed. The starting lineup is strong but greater depth, with another European campaign in the offing, is imperative for the club. Óscar Mingueza was a sensible signing on a free, especially after not replacing Marc Guéhi in January. Walter Benítez may leave in search of first-team football, which would leave a gap in the goalkeeping department. WU
Major ins Óscar Mingueza (Celta Vigo, free)
Everton
Young, developing potential has been recruited so far in the form of Hayden Hackney - player of the season in the Championship with Middlesbrough in 2025-26 - Tyrique George and Merlin Röhl, the last two after loan spells with David Moyes's side last season. But established players are still required to fill several weak spots, especially at right-back, a position that has needed strengthening for far too long now, and centre-forward. Left-back, central midfield and another wide player - the return of Jack Grealish possibly - would also be on the wishlist. Andy Hunter
Major ins Tyrique George (Chelsea, £18m), Merlin Röhl (Freiburg, £17.3m), Hayden Hackney (Middlesbrough, £16.5m) Major outs Séamus Coleman (released)
Fulham
It is a new era at Craven Cottage under Álvaro Arbeloa and there is much work to be done. The loss of Raúl Jiménez and, more important, the player of the season, Harry Wilson, means there are holes to fill. Like a year ago, it's been a slow start to the window and things will need to speed up if they are to find a new striker, winger and a centre-back. Real Madrid's Franco Mastantuono and Gonzalo García are under consideration, having previously worked with Arbeloa. WU
Major ins Jonah Kusi-Asare (Bayern Munich, £5.2m) Major outs Issa Diop (Ipswich, £8.5m), Harry Wilson (Leeds, free), Raúl Jiménez (Wolves, free)
Hull
After avoiding an expected six-point deduction for breaching spending rules by selling the goalkeeper Ivor Pandur and the midfielder Aidon Shehu to Rangers and Panathinaikos respectively for a combined £8.5m at the end of June, the playoff winners aim to make 10-12 new signings before September. Reinforcements are required all over the pitch, with central defence, central midfield and attack particular priorities. "Think about us like a volcano," says Hull's owner, Acun Ilicali. "It's boiling right now and it's going to erupt." Yet as much as the manager, Sergej Jakirovic, needs new faces he will be anxious to retain last season's exceptionally powerful team spirit. Inspired loans and free transfer imports could prove crucial. Louise Taylor
Major ins Jack Butland (Rangers, £3.5m) Major outs Ivor Pandur (Rangers, £6m)
Ipswich
Promotion brings enough problems but doing so with a new manager brings added complexity as Gary O'Neil seeks to shape his squad. The aim is to be better prepared for the Premier League than last time by signing those with the physicality to compete in the top flight, preferably having done so before, hence the signing of Issa Diop. Inroads have been made but the spine of the team needs strengthening, especially in midfield and at centre-forward. WU
Major ins Emersonn (Toulouse, £24m), Abdul Fatawu (Leicester, £20m), Issa Diop (Fulham, £8.5m), Chuba Akpom (Ajax, £7m) Major outs Arijanet Muric (Sassuolo, £6m)
Leeds
Daniel Farke has traditionally preferred to operate with a small, closely bonded, first-team squad but acknowledges a little expansion is required. As the defender Joe Rodon recently put it: "We want to make our squad bigger and better." So far, though, the goalkeeping department has shrunk appreciably, with Karl Darlow and Illan Meslier having left while Lucas Perri is coveted by Torino. If new keepers currently top Farke's shopping list - and Manchester City's and England's James Trafford in particular - the Southampton central midfielder Shea Charles is not far behind. Leeds seem determined to acquire the 22-year-old but the Champonship club are reluctant sellers who will demand top dollar. With Harry Wilson and Tarik Muharemovic having already arrived to reinforce attack and central defence respectively, considerable focus is on midfield where Julian Brandt, a free agent after leaving Borussia Dortmund, is also coveted. LT
Major ins Tarik Muharemovic (Sassuolo, £34.1m), Harry Wilson (Fulham, free) Major outs Pascal Struijk (Brighton, £18m), Karl Darlow (Manchester United, free)
Liverpool
Arne Slot wanted two new wingers and a right-back before he was sacked in May and the change of head coach has not changed Liverpool's priorities. Victor Muñoz has been signed as a versatile forward but not as an immediate starter under Andoni Iraola, and the pursuit of top wide talent continues. Bradley Barcola and Yan Diomande are of interest, although Paris Saint-Germain may determine both their futures. Iraola is concerned at the thinness of his defensive options and, while in an ideal world he would consider Conor Bradley to be Liverpool's first-choice right back, the Northern Irishman's recovery from a serious knee injury is likely to force another transfer move. AH. AH
Major ins Jérémy Jacquet (Rennes, £55m), Víctor Muñoz (Osasuna, £34.5m) Major outs Mohamed Salah (released), Ibrahima Konaté (Real Madrid, free), Andy Robertson (Tottenham, free)
Manchester City
Elliot Anderson may already have joined for a British record transfer fee but City are still in the market for another midfielder, with the 18-year-old Morocco international Ayyoub Bouaddi being targeted for about £85m. Enzo Maresca also has Malo Gusto, one of his right-backs when he was Chelsea head coach, on the radar. A striker will be on the list, too, if Omar Marmoush leaves. And with Real Madrid retaining an interest, will Rodri sign on again? Spain's World Cup-winning captain has a year left on his contract and his stock has rocketed. The incomings mean several players could leave, with Kalvin Phillips, Jack Grealish, Tijjani Reijnders, Nico González, Savinho and James Trafford among them. Jamie Jackson
Major ins Elliot Anderson (Nottingham Forest, £116m), Mathys Detourbet (Troyes, £21.6m), Jeremy Monga (Leicester, £12.5m) Major outs Nathan Aké (Fenerbahce, £7m), Bernardo Silva (Real Madrid, free), John Stones (free agent)
Manchester United
Michael Carrick is keen to add a third new midfielder after the arrivals of Andrey Santos and Youri Tielemans, with Real Madrid's Eduardo Camavinga, Bournemouth's Alex Scott, Roma's Manu Koné and Fulham's Sander Berge on the list. He is also considering a move for a left-back: Newcastle's Lewis Hall and Fulham's Antonee Robinson are being monitored. There will be outgoings too. At 28 Marcus Rashford is in his prime and available, surely for a fee in the same region as the £26m Barcelona balked at. Player and club want an exit yet at the moment he will start the new season at United. For the right deal this will change. JJ
Major ins Andrey Santos (Chelsea, £50m), Youri Tielemans (Aston Villa, £35m) Major outs Rasmus Højlund (Napoli, £43.2m)
Newcastle
Much hinges on whether Bruno Guimarães stays or departs for Arsenal during a summer already featuring a significant changing of the St James' Park guard. The adjustment to life after Anthony Gordon and Sandro Tonali could be eased if Eddie Howe is able to attract a higher calibre central midfielder - Monaco's Aladji Bamba has joined for £34m - and goalkeeper - Parma's Zion Suzuki is one possibility. Most signings will be expected to conform to Newcastle's new transfer policy of recruiting players aged 24 and under, with a valuation broadly between £20m and £40m. Meanwhile Nick Pope, Joe Willock and Jacob Murphy could depart. The club are operating under a three-year Uefa settlement agreement after breaching European spending rules but Howe's overriding current priority is keeping Guimarães. LT
Major ins Bazoumana Touré (Hoffenheim, £43m), Ewen Jaouen (Reims, £21.6m), Sean Steur (Ajax, £20m), Aladji Bamba (Monaco, £34m) Major outs Sandro Tonali (Tottenham, £92.5m), Anthony Gordon (Barcelona, £69.3m), Kieran Trippier (Wolves, free)
Nottingham Forest
Spending the money made from the Elliot Anderson sale is a top priority. Lucas Bergvall leads the list of replacements and the midfielder has told Tottenham his preference is to move to the City Ground but a deal needs to be agreed. If not, Monaco's Lamine Camara could become part of the thinking. A new right-wingback and striker are also being plotted, with Sporting's Ousmane Diomande a target in central defence. There is no requirement to sell any key players but the futures of some on the fringes are up in the air. WU
Major outs Elliot Anderson (Manchester City, £116m)
Sunderland
Régis Le Bris says he is hoping to add "six or seven" new players this summer. Sunderland's manager wants to ensure the squad is sufficiently robust to cope with the twin demands of Premier League and Europa League campaigns but has been bolstered by Granit Xhaka's decision to recommit to the club amid interest in the captain from Chelsea. If recruiting holding midfield cover for Xhaka is one transfer priority, so too is providing Brian Brobbey with high-calibre attacking competition while also fortifying the right-winger and left-back positions. Le Bris is under no pressure to sell, so any attempts to acquire his increasingly influential attacking midfielder Enzo Le Fée will be strongly resisted. LT
Major ins Thomas Meunier (Lille, free) Major outs Eliezer Mayenda (Rennes, £17.1m)
Tottenham
Despite acquiring a new central midfield and a new central defence, Roberto De Zerbi said Spurs are "not finished yet" in the transfer market. An upgrade on Richarlison up front should be a priority, while Marcus Rashford could be a blockbuster arrival out wide. As for outgoings, Cristian Romero and Lucas Bergvall could follow Luka Vuskovic and Will Lankshear through the door. Interest in Pedro Porro will be high after his outstanding World Cup and there is still uncertainty over Guglielmo Vicario's future in goal. BM
Major ins Sandro Tonali (Newcastle, £92.5m), Mateus Fernandes (West Ham, £85m), Jan Paul van Hecke (Brighton, £52m), Andy Robertson (Liverpool, free), Marcos Senesi (Bournemouth, free), Martin Dubravka (Burnley, free) Major outs Luka Vuskovic (Brighton, £46m), Radu Dragusin (Fiorentina, loan)