As peak heatwave sun beams down on to a field in Derbyshire, Amy Winehouse tells the crowd she is in need of hydration - so Robbie Williams fetches her a drink. Elsewhere, members of the public stop the Beastie Boys for selfies, Fred Durst grooves along as Diana Ross covers Al Green, and shirtless teenagers form a circle pit during Korn as a woman sits knitting in a camping chair just behind them. James Brown and Prince turn out to be the same artist - just dressed up in different clothes.
These are all scenes from Replika festival last month, which won the Guinness world record for the biggest tribute festival, with 108 acts performing across a very sweaty weekend. The punning deserves an accolade of its own: acts included Catfishing the Bottlemen, Pearl Scam, Wrong Jovi and Iffy Clyro.
It is far from the only event of its kind. The UK is inundated this summer, with Fake-Fest, Tribfest, Glastonbudget, Festwich, Tidal Gathering, Could Be Real and numerous others. Similarly, music venues across the country have listings crammed with tribute acts. Dave Bevan, managing director of Alive Network Entertainment Agency - which represents 234 such acts - estimates that there are between 3,000 and 5,000 outfits in operation in the UK.
The reason so many of these events and gigs are thriving is because going to see the original artist is often prohibitively expensive, especially during a cost of living crisis, while these gigs offer cheap access to live music, with songs you are guaranteed to know and love. Replika charges £100 for a weekend ticket. Its organiser, James Dean, says: "Our festival is targeted at low- to middle-income families who have very little disposable income. Compare that with the costs of going to Wembley Stadium for a single concert." This is echoed by one group of young lads I speak to at the festival: "It's cheap, local and a laugh."
Dan Budd, who has performed as Robbie Williams for the last 14 years, is disarmingly good on stage, full of the requisite swagger and cheekiness, plus he has the same Stoke accent and even has matching real tattoos. "I don't think I've ever been busier in terms of bookings," he says. "I haven't got a free Saturday night until September 2027."
Dean tells me that the very top acts in the game will pull in £10,000-£15,000 a show. Budd won't give me specific figures but says: "Put it this way, I'm 36 and mortgage-free."
Similarly, Nadine l'Amour - who performs as Amy Winehouse under the name the Madnezz of Amy - is flying. She set foot on stage as Winehouse for the first time in December 2024 but, by April 2025, she had quit her job as a secondary school teacher to do it full-time. Like Budd, L'Amour has replicated Winehouse's tattoos, though she is such a fan that they were done years before she got into the tribute game.
"There are 14- and 15-year-old girls singing every single word," she says of her shows. "I have young people saying: 'I never got to see Amy, but watching you on stage, I feel like that's the closest thing I'll ever get.'"
It is not just individuals such as L'Amour and Budd who are benefiting. According to the charity Music Venue Trust (MVT), at a time when half the UK's grassroots music venues make no profit, tribute artists are helping to keep the entire sector afloat.
"There is an elitist attitude about them, but these acts really do keep parts of the live music infrastructure moving," says Nathan Clark, owner of the Brudenell Social Club in Leeds, one of the most well-respected and thoughtfully curated independent music venues in the country. Despite its buzzy reputation for cutting-edge newcomers and international indie stars, tribute bands play a significant role there. "Not every gig has to be about discovering the future," he says. "The key is balance: tribute bands should support original music, not replace it."
There is no hard data on the precise financial impact of tribute acts. MVT's chief executive, Mark Davyd, guesses that they make up about 25-30% of all bookings in independent venues across the UK. The Night Time Industries Association also states there is no authoritative number, but a spokesperson says tribute acts contribute "many millions of pounds each year" to the live music industry.
Dean had an independent survey carried out on his festival's economic impact over the last 10 years - including associated local spending on travel, hotels, supermarkets and so on - and it came out at about £8.5m. Given the number of touring tribute bands, festivals, gigs and events, he estimates a number that could stretch into hundreds of millions of pounds overall across the same 10-year span.
One reason this huge sector is being overlooked and undocumented is because it is often seen as a bit feeble or regressive. "People, especially in the mainstream music industry, look at us as nonstarters," says Dean. "We're not really taken seriously." But tribute acts are no longer just dodgy Elvis impersonators with wayward pitch. "We've had a couple of Take That tributes who were able to sing a lot better than Robbie Williams and Gary Barlow," says Dean; Clark points out that Graham Sampson of the Smyths, a Smiths tribute band, can probably hold a note better than Morrissey.
Such skill and dedication in mirroring others can bring with it an emotional toll. "Four or five years into it, I had a bit of a breakdown," says Budd. "I couldn't keep up with being one person in my private life and then going into Robbie mode and then having to switch it off again. It was like a split personality." But Budd has found a way around it, performing a different set every night to keep it fresh, merging deep cuts with hits, and also being less gung-ho about inhabiting Williams. "As I've matured, I go on stage as Dan and I sing the songs in his style and manner," he says.
When you love the act you are portraying, it can be more than just a gig. "There are a couple of songs that send me back to a time in my life that was quite dark," says L'Amour. "Back to Black puts a very big lump in my throat when I sing that. It's not only remembering my pain, but also the pain that Amy felt." At Replika, L'Amour dedicates that song, very movingly, to a friend who has recently died. "As hard as it is to sing, it's nice to dedicate that song to my friend who I lost to mental health," she tells me later. "And that was also down to losing the person that she loved, and drinking and everything that was involved in that."
L'Amour says that while some people - such as Replika's Prince-James Brown combo - moonlight in numerous tribute acts, she could only ever do Winehouse because of the significance of the material. "This is more than sticking on eyeliner, backcombing the beehive and putting on really expensive, uncomfortable shoes," she says. "It's a feeling. That gut-wrenching first love that kicks you in the stomach; having your heart broken beyond repair. But then being able to pour that out to the audience and feeling that love come back. It's way more than a tribute for me."
Tribute acts also have a domino impact on other areas in the industry. "It may not always be treated as culturally prestigious but it creates employment," Clark says. "It drives paying musicians, designers, promoters, venues." He points to the Smyths having a four-night run coming up at his venue. "What original bands at this grassroots level can do four nights and sell them out?" he asks. "Very few. Those four shows allow us to take the risk on booking something else."
Tribute bands also tend to bring in "exponentially higher" bar revenue for venues, according to Davyd, as gigs are usually held at the weekend and are often attended by groups of people. Clark agrees: "A tribute show is often more of a social night out: people are relaxed, they know the songs, they sing together ... it's like a celebration. For independent venues, that matters. Bar income is a major part of how grassroots venues survive."
Davyd points out that tribute acts "fill up the programme" in smaller towns "where there is an absence of touring acts", which is a mixed blessing. Yes, they allow people to see live music in places bigger acts ignore, but does their success make it harder for acts starting out who are writing and performing their own material? "Any experience with live music is really important for social interaction, community cohesion and a whole bunch of reasons," he says. "But we really need to be concerned about generating the next wave of great British talent. I would prefer there was more space for that. Tribute bands are an important part of the grassroots sector but we wouldn't like them to become the sole reason venues are open."
What is clear at Replika festival is that while, for many, these bands are vehicles for pure nostalgia, comfort and familiarity - big Oasis choruses, indelible Beatles hooks and sugary 00s pop - they are also a first gateway to music. It is genuinely endearing watching battle-jacket-clad children navigating their first mosh pit and working out the rhythms and etiquette, as a fake Limp Bizkit turns a sizeable tent into an explosion of bouncing bodies. And it is a dream come true for the band members, too, who seem blown away by the response. The turntablist shouts out to his parents in the audience, his adrenaline clearly pumping, as he declares: "They keep telling me to get a real job - but look at me now!"