Introduction: Oil heads back towards $100 a barrel
Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of business, the financial markets and the world economy.
The global economy faces the prospect of $100 a barrel oil again, as the conflict in the Middle East continues.
Brent crude has risen back over the $98 a barrel mark already this week, its highest level since 24 July. Oil has been pushed up by reports that Yemen's Iran-aligned Houthis attacked energy facilities in Saudi Arabia.
Saudi authorities said operations at some energy facilities had been halted today following attacks by Yemen's Iran-aligned Houthis that wounded more than 70 people.
The attacks add to the pressure on oil and gas production in the region, which remains badly disrupted by the ongoing Iran war.
Yesterday, the Financial Times reported that Saudi Aramco's oil facilities in the Saudi Arabian city of Jizan - where one of the country's largest refineries is based - have been attacked
Earlier today, Iran threatened to create a new restricted zone in the Gulf if the US pressed on with its 'economic warfare' against Tehran.
Such a zone would, presumably, further undermine US efforts to reopen the strait of Hormuz.
Mohsen Rezaei, the secretary of Iran's Supreme National Security Council, said Iran had " fundamentally recalibrated" its posture towards US forces.
Rezaei posted on X:
In recent days, Washington has received a clear warning from Iran's new missiles. Economic warfare will be met by a maritime exclusion zone across the Persian Gulf to the blockade perimeter. The operational posture toward U.S. warships and bases has been fundamentally recalibrated.
Shipping traffic through the Strait of Hormuz has already slowed this week - just seven commodity vessels sailing through the Strait of Hormuz on Monday, down from eight on Sunday. Before the war began, about 130 ships a day would cross the strait.
This is all a headache for central bankers, as high oil prices create inflationary pressures through the economy. Later today, MPs in London will question Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey, and colleagues, about their recent decision to hold the Bank Rate at 3.75%.
MPs are likely to question witnesses on the potential inflationary impact of the ongoing war in Iran and how the MPC considers recent developments in AI, the committee says.
The agenda
7am BST: German trade data for July
7.45am BST: French trade data for July
2.15pm BST: Bank of England policymakers appear before the Treasury select committee
The British government has signalled its backing for rail freight by setting a new target to grow the volume of goods carried on UK trains by 40% by 2040.
The target had been sought by private freight train operators concerned about their future under the new Great British Railways, where they will be competing for space on the tracks with publicly owned passenger services.
Transport secretary HeidiAlexander said GBR would have a "clear mission to help grow our economy by moving more of the goods British businesses rely on".
She said the target would give the rail freight industry certainty to invest and support jobs across the country.
Meeting the target is expected to mean around £15bn more goods moved by rail annually, saving up to one million tonnes of CO2 a year by taking lorries off the roads, according to the Department for Transport.
The Railways Bill to set up GBR is now in the committee stage in the House of Lords, and will give the new arms-length body running the railways clear duties to support freight growth.
Maggie Simpson, director general of the RailFreightGroup, said the sector was "ready to fulfil government's bold targets for growth, making an even stronger contribution to the nation's productivity, development and resilience."
In three hour time, MPs on the Treasury select committee will be quizzing the Bank of England's top brass.
Professor CostasMilas of the Management School at UniversityofLiverpool has some questions for them to fire at governor Bailey:
In light of turbulence (albeit receding) in bond markets, what Andrew Bailey and the MPC are planning to do for Quantitative Tightening (QT)? Will they continue with an annual pace of gilt sales of £70bn, or perhaps, they are more minded to slow down the pace?
Does Andrew Bailey and the MPC still believe that QT "inflates" UK yields by only 20 to 30 basis points? If this is still their view, in contrast to my BoE Staff Working Paper joint with Michael Ellington (Liverpool University) and Ryland Thomas (BoE) which finds a higher impact on yields of up to 40 basis points, why not continue with £70bn of QT also for the next 12 months? Not least because the lower the pace of QT, the lower the depressing impact of QT on inflation (our BoE paper finds that QT suppressed inflation by 1.4 percentage points).
How about the recent idea of swapping long-term debt with short-term one? This idea was put forward by e.g. Financial Times Alphaville yesterday which has the potential of relieving pressure on long yields.
Optimism among US small business owners has dropped, as they are hit by rising prices.
The NFIB Small Business Optimism Index dipped in August to 98.7, down 1.1 points compared with July.
NFIB chief economist Bill Dunkelberg explains:
"Uncertainty remains elevated among small business owners as they face a mixed set of challenges with weakened sales, supply chain disruptions, and inflation pressures.
"While expectations for the overall economy dimmed, Main Street owners remain largely positive in the health of their own businesses."
Ouch! European gas price have continued to rise, and are at their highest levels since January 2023.
The month-ahead UK gas price is now up more than 3% at 188p a therm, over the highs seen yesterday.
Continental European prices are also the highest since January 2023, at €75.70 per megawatt hour, which will fuel fears of a winter gas crisis in Europe.
Newsflash: South Africa's economy is on the brink of recession after contracting in the second quarter of this year.
New data shows that South Africa's GSP fell by 0.2% in April-June, ending a run of six quarters of growth in a row.
Mining, trade and manufacturing drove down economic activity on the production side of the economy, while a sharp rise in imports and subdued investment constrained growth on the expenditure side, reported South Africa's statistics body, adding:
Following six straight quarters of growth, the trade industry wobbled in the second quarter, shrinking by 1.9%.
This was due to a decline in wholesale trade, motor trade and the food & beverages industry. Consumer activity remained relatively upbeat, reflected in stronger retail trade and accommodation. Motor trade was dragged lower by softer fuel sales, but new vehicle sales continued to strengthen.
Middle East developments are "clouding the outlook again", reports AchilleasGeorgolopoulos, senior market analyst at TradingPoint:
Yemen forces took over from Iran, attacking Saudi Arabian oil facilities, confirming that, despite reports of an imminent agreement between Oman and Iran about the Strait of Hormuz, the termination of the seven-month-old regional conflict remains elusive.
Expectations that the US President might try to sort out this conflict soon, so he can almost entirely focus on the critical November 3 midterm elections that could upset the current balance in the Senate, have yet to be confirmed.
Oil is the focal point for markets today, reports Neil Wilson, SaxoUK investor strategist, with bond yields up and stocks trade broadly lower.
Brent crude trades higher for a third straight session, approaching $100 amid reports that Yemen's Iran-backed Houthis have hit energy facilities in Saudi Arabia. Operations at energy sites near to Yemen have been halted.
It comes after reports that Saudi Aramco's Jizan refinery was hit, whilst Iran said it's close to doing a deal with Oman to manage the waterway. With Brent approaching $100 markets are pricing in a longer war and more disruption to global energy markets. Brent rallied +2% to above $99, where it's closed the gap to the 24 July close.
A sense today of disruption and conflict being a feature rather than a bug, and the implications for global markets that follow from structurally higher inflation dynamic alongside fiscal pressures. It's unclear whether there is a way out for Trump here. Look for a breach of $100 to potentially get driven up on technical momentum to $102, the 23 July peak.
UK mortgage rates have risen again today, as the recent bond market turbulence hits borrowers.
Data provider Moneyfacts reports that the average two-year fixed residential mortgage rate is at its highest since 7 June, while the average five-year is at its highest since 10 May.
The average 2-year fixed residential mortgage rate today is 5.65%. This is up from 5.63% the previous working day.
The average 5-year fixed residential mortgage rate today is 5.70%. This is up from 5.68% the previous working day.
Lenders are also withdrawing some products from the market. There are currently 7,417 residential mortgage products available, down from 7,485 yesterday.
Philip Scott, partner, banking & finance at legal firm Walker Morris, has warned that businesses should be concerned too:
"The recent increase in bond yields and market expectations of higher interest rates is not just a concern for homeowners. Businesses across the UK should also be paying close attention because movements in the wider debt markets ultimately influence the cost and availability of corporate finance."
"For companies with existing facilities approaching maturity, refinancing may become more expensive than anticipated. Businesses considering acquisitions, capital investment or expansion plans may also find that the economics of those projects look different as borrowing costs rise."
"While lenders remain open for business, we are likely to see greater scrutiny around cashflow forecasts, leverage levels and covenant compliance. In that environment, preparation becomes increasingly important."
Novartis shares slide after drugs trial disappointment
Swiss pharmaceuticals group Novartis is heading for its worst day on the stock market ever, after releasing disappointing medical trial data.
Novartis reported this morning that its experimental drug for a muscle wasting disorder failed in a late-stage study.
The drug is called del-desiran. Novartis had been testing whether it helped patients with myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), but found that it did not demonstrate statistically significant improvement versus a placebo.
ShreeramAradhye, president, development and chief medical officer, Novartis, explains:
"Despite decades of research, there are still no approved treatment options for DM1, and patients and caregivers continue to face a significant daily burden.
"Developing therapies for a complex disease like DM1 remains challenging, and setbacks are part of scientific progress. As we continue to evaluate the full HARBOR dataset, we remain committed to identifying the most appropriate development path for the del-desiran program and advancing innovative approaches for people living with DM1 and other serious neuromuscular diseases."
Novartis's shares are down 10%, which would be their biggest daily fall on record.
The company was created by the merger of Swiss chemical and pharmaceutical companies Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz in 1996. The Sandoz family remain its third-largest shareholder, through their Foundation, founded by sculptor and painter Édouard-Marcel Sandoz.