Auston Kim misses a short birdie putt on 4, and Lottie Woad, who had already converted, hits the front. Megan Khang shaves the cup on 11; so close to a bounceback birdie, but Charley Hull remains 2UP. And Celine Boutier leaves a birdie putt one roll short on 1, so no fast start for Europe in the anchor match. But Mimi Rhodes rattles in a 15-footer for birdie at 8 to halve the hole and hang on in there against Nelly Korda.
2UP Hull v Khang (11)
4UP Henseleit v Al. Lee (9)
3UP Grant v Yin (8)
Rhodes v Korda 2UP (8)
2UP Koerstz Madsen v Corpuz (6)
Nadaud A/S An. Lee (4)
Lopez Ramirez A/S Noh (4)
1UP Woad v Kim (4)
Maguire v Coughlin 1UP (3)
Stark A/S Duncan (2)
Ciganda A/S Kupcho (1)
Boutier A/S Zhang (1)
Par is enough to win the 6th hole for Nanna Madsen. Europe looking good at the top end of the scoreboard, but with so many players currently on terms, you'd be a brave soul to bet the farm on the outcome.
2UP Hull v Khang (10)
4UP Henseleit v Al. Lee (9)
3UP Grant v Yin (8)
Rhodes v Korda 2UP (7)
2UP Koerstz Madsen v Corpuz (6)
Nadaud A/S An. Lee (4)
Lopez Ramirez A/S Noh (4)
Woad A/S Kim (3)
Maguire v Coughlin 1UP (2)
Stark A/S Duncan (2)
Ciganda A/S Kupcho (1)
Boutier v Zhang
A third birdie of the day for the world number one Nelly Korda, this time at 7. She moves a couple up against Mimi Rhodes. Linn Grant and Angel Yin both make their birdie putts on 8, the latter snapping that dismal five-bogey streak. Charley Hull's two big hits into 10 prove enough to win the hole and double her lead over Megan Khang. Meanwhile Celine Boutier and Rose Zhang arrive on the 1st tee, and now all of the matches are out on the course.
Linn Grant cops a decent lie on a bald spot amid the heather down the right of 8. She takes advantage of her good fortune by wedging to eight feet. That turns the pressure up on Angel Yin, but she clips crisply out of the bunker to six feet. Putting contest coming up. Meanwhile Lottie Woad and Auston Kim trade birdies on 3, the former with an iron to four feet, the latter with a 20-foot putt. And on 4, Yealimi Noh and Julia Lopez Ramirez take turns to miss three-footers and the hole is somehow halved.
Angel Yin has made five bogeys in a row. But she's got the advantage on the short par-four 8th, finding the bunker guarding the front left of the green, Linn Grant flaying her tee shot towards heather down the right. Meanwhile up on the par-five 10th, Charley Hull hammers a fairway wood onto the front of the green to set up a long eagle chance. Her opponent Megan Khang is forced to lay up.
Having found water on 5, Angel Yin does it again on 7. Her ball in a creek guarding the front of the green. It costs her another hole. Julia Lopez Ramirez birdies 3 to level against Yealimi Noh. Meanwhile Nelly Korda drains a 25-footer on 6 to regain the lead against Mimi Rhodes.
1UP Hull v Khang (9)
4UP Henseleit v Al. Lee (8)
3UP Grant v Yin (7)
Rhodes v Korda 1UP (6)
1UP Koerstz Madsen v Corpuz (4)
Nadaud A/S An. Lee (4)
Lopez Ramirez A/S Noh (3)
Woad A/S Kim (2)
Maguire v Coughlin 1UP (1)
Stark A/S Duncan (1)
Ciganda v Kupcho
It's going extremely well for Europe at the moment. Even a birdie for Yealimi Noh on 2, which gives her the lead against Julia Lopez Ramirez, doesn't change that. But the USA have started slowly in most of the disciplines so far, and managed to fight their way back on the later holes. There's a long way to go. It's still absolutely hosing down, by the way.
Birdie for Mimi Rhodes at 5, and the rookie has tied up her match against the world number one Nelly Korda! Another European rookie, Nastasia Nadaud, levels up against Andrea Lee, the latter having found that water. And so for a few seconds, there's no red on the board ... until Lauren Coughlin walks in a par putt on 1 to go up early doors against Leona Maguire. Meanwhile Alison Lee's antics down 7 hands another hole to Esther Henselit, as expected.
1UP Hull v Khang (8)
4UP Henseleit v Al. Lee (7)
2UP Grant v Yin (6)
Rhodes A/S Korda (5)
1UP Koerstz Madsen v Corpuz (4)
Nadaud A/S An. Lee (3)
Lopez Ramirez A/S Noh (1)
Woad A/S Kim (1)
Maguire v Coughlin 1UP (1)
Stark v Duncan
Angel Yin misses the green at the par-three 6th, and it's another hole for Linn Grant. Her third in four holes. Yin's lack of competitive action catching up with her big-time. Alison Lee sends her third at 3 into a greenside bunker. And a messy double bogey by Nanna Madsen on 4 cuts her lead in half.
Not a good moment if your name is Lee. Alison's tee shot at 7 ends up under a tree atop some pine cones, and she's forced to punch out. Esther Henseleit finds the green in regulation and the US are in a spot of bother there. See also Andrea on 3, as her ball takes a flyer, whistling through the green and towards the water behind. She might have gone through the reeds and in, it's not clear from the pictures. Either way, it's not going to be good news for her.
Esther Henseleit becomes the first player today to go three holes up. Her tee shot at the par-three 6th finds the meat of the green; Alison Lee's effort bounds through and down the swale at the back. Lee can't get up and down, and par is enough for the German. Angel Yin's visit to the water on 5 costs her the hole and gifts Linn Grant the lead. But there's better news for the USA on 2, where Andrea Lee's birdie puts some red on the board.
1UP Hull v Khang (7)
3UP Henseleit v Al. Lee (6)
1UP Grant v Yin (5)
Rhodes v Korda 1UP (4)
2UP Koerstz Madsen v Corpuz (3)
Nadaud v An. Lee 1UP (2)
Lopez Ramirez A/S Noh (1)
Woad v Kim
Angel Yin started fast, but having not played so much golf this year, the rust is beginning to show. She carves her third at 5 into the drink on the right. As if it isn't wet enough.
The rain is coming down in stair rods now. Players taking their shots as quickly as possible before scuttling back under the nearest umbrella. It's cold as well. In theory, these conditions should favour the Europeans, who will be more used to them ... but Angela Stanford sent her players out to practice under a deluge on Wednesday, and was at pains to emphasise that the US are prepared and ready to deal with wet weather. Thrills and spills ahoy!
Nanna Madsen looks to have benefitted from putting her feet up yesterday. She's now followed birdie at 1 with another at 2, and she's flown out of the traps. See also Esther Henseleit, who rolls in a 15-footer on 5 for birdie and Europe are 2UP in that match as well!
1UP Hull v Khang (6)
2UP Henseleit v Al. Lee (5)
Grant A/S Yin (4)
Rhodes v Korda 1UP (3)
2UP Koerstz Madsen v Corpuz (2)
Nadaud A/S An. Lee (1)
Lopez Ramirez v Noh
Nastasia Nadaud and Andrea Lee take turns to shave the lip with mid-range birdie putts on 1. Up on 4, Angel Yin leaves a monster birdie effort a good ten feet short, and doesn't lose her turn. She can't make the par saver ... but Linn Grant spurns the opportunity to win the hole from five feet, her ball breaking away on the low side. Grant doesn't concede Yin's bogey putt, which to be fair looks well inside the leather. Gauntlet down, gloves off, Yin converts but doesn't look particularly happy about it. That may have been the entire point, of course.
1UP Hull v Khang (5)
1UP Henseleit v Al. Lee (4)
Grant A/S Yin (4)
Rhodes v Korda 1UP (2)
1UP Koerstz Madsen v Corpuz (1)
Nadaud A/S An. Lee (1)
Lopez Ramirez v Noh
Charley Hull has a reasonably straight six-footer on 5 for birdie and the win. But she leaves it up on the high side. Bit of a misread. An opportunity goes by. The rain is getting heavier.
Mimi Rhodes isn't close at 2. Nelly Korda is. Rhodes leaves a 50-foot putt ten short, but she doesn't get the opportunity to make par, because Korda steers in a gentle left-to-right curler from eight feet to hit the front in that match. Meanwhile bogey for Angel Yin at 3 gifts Linn Grant parity in match three.
1UP Hull v Khang (4)
1UP Henseleit v Al. Lee (4)
Grant A/S Yin (3)
Rhodes v Korda 1UP (2)
1UP Koerstz Madsen v Corpuz (1)
Nadaud v An. Lee
Allisen Corpuz - in the bunker at the back of 1, having earlier been forced to chop out from the heather - has to hole out for the half. She can't do it. Europe go 1UP. Back on the tee, the latest match to go out is Andrea Lee versus the impressive rookie Nastasia Nadaud, the youngest player here this week. Two points in the bag for the 21-year-old French star-in-the-making already.
Charley Hull carves her tee shot at the par-three 4th into rough to the right of the green. But she nearly holes the chip up, and that's enough to scramble the half and retain her lead. Meanwhile on 1, Allisen Corpuz becomes the latest US player to find the bunker at the back of the green. Nanna Madsen nearly does the same, but her ball grabs the last bit of green and spins back to 12 feet. Advantage Europe in that one.
Mimi Rhodes very nearly drains a 30-footer on 1 for an early lead. But the ball stops one turn short. Not many putts racing past the hole so far. Not any. Back on the tee, Allisen Corpuz pulls her opening drive into the heather down the left. Her ball rears up and hits a marshal on the jacksie, a lovely cartoon touch. But back into the heather it disappears. From bracket to bracken. Nanna Madsen, freshly rested after a day off, splits the fairway. Meanwhile up on 2, Angel Yin spins her approach to kick-in range, and that's the first dash of red on the board this morning.
1UP Hull v Khang (3)
1UP Henseleit v Al. Lee (2)
Grant v Yin 1UP (2)
Rhodes A/S Korda (1)
Koerstz Madsen v Corpuz
Alison Lee gets a bit of a flyer out of wet semi-rough down the right of 2. She doesn't get close to the flag, and though she lags her long birdie putt up to tap-in distance, Esther Henseleit has thrown a dart to six feet from the centre of the fairway and tidies up for birdie. Another splash of blue on the scoreboard. That putt only just dropped, though. The greens slow, to belabour the point.
1UP Hull v Khang (3)
1UP Henseleit v Al. Lee (2)
Grant A/S Yin (1)
Rhodes v Korda
The greens haven't run this slow all week: 10 on the stimp compared to 10.3 yesterday. And the players are struggling with the pace in these early matches. Angel Yin and Linn Grant become the latest to leave fairly straight birdie putts a couple of inches short on 1. Back on the tee, the world number one Nelly Korda prepares to face the rookie Mimi Rhodes, who already has two points in the bag for Europe this week. She's on record as saying she loves a challenge and the heat of battle; she's certainly got all of that on her plate today. They both find the wide, generous fairway.
1UP Hull v Khang (2)
Henseleit A/S Al. Lee (1)
Grant A/S Yin (1)
Rhodes v Korda
Charley Hull lets go of her club - a wet grip? - while sending her second at the par-five 2nd into a fairway bunker. She whips into the green and makes par, but Megan Khang set up a six-foot birdie chance to level the match. However she repeats the error of the 1st hole, leaving a dribbler short, failing to take into account the slowness of the wet greens. A let-off for Hull.
1UP Hull v Khang (2)
Henseleit A/S Al. Lee (1)
Grant v Yin
Angel Yin hasn't played too much golf recently - she's been ill earlier in the year, and sat out yesterday altogether - but displays no nerves in sending her opening drive down the middle. Linn Grant follows her. Up on the green, Alison Lee gets up and down from the bunker to salvage a half.
1UP Hull v Khang (1)
Henseleit A/S Al. Lee (1)
Grant v Yin
With the rain still coming down, and forecast to get heavier in the early afternoon, it's preferred lies today. Finding the fairway more important than ever. But you still have to take advantage. Esther Henseleit throws a dart at the flagstick on 1, her ball ten feet shy of the pin. But Alison Lee makes exactly the same mistake Megan Khang did, finding the bunker at the back. She's left with a slight downhill lie and not much green to play with. More good news for Europe coming up?
The US captain Angela Stanford references Jennifer Kupcho's heroics as she makes a bullish statement to Sky: "We needed a jolt ... they're all fired up this morning ... I'm pretty confident in the end of our line-up ... they're ready."
Esther Henseleit and Alison Lee take turns to split the fairway with their opening drives. Up on the green, Megan Khang doesn't give her five-footer enough oomph, the moisture on the green doing a number on her. The ball stays on the edge. The door open for Hull, and she walks on through. First blood to Europe!
Hull is further from the flag so will take her putt first. A 30-footer with some right-to-left swing. She leaves the putt three feet short, the morning rain having slowed the greens. Khang splashes out from the bunker to five feet. A couple of little testers coming up. Back on the tee, the second match of Esther Henseleit and Alison Lee arrives for work. Bedlam, bedlam, bedlam.
The adrenaline must be pumping ... and Megan Khang sends her approach through the green into a bunker at the back of 1. She can't believe it. "Long?!" she asks her caddie. It's long. Charley Hull responds with a slightly conservative play, finding the heart of the green, the pin tucked back left near Khang's bunker. But that's a slight advantage to Europe.
Here we go, then ... it's come to this. A rainy day at Bernardus Golf in Cromvoirt near Den Bosch in North Brabant, Netherlands. The gallery in good voice nonetheless. The first match of Charley Hull and Megan Khang receive the ovation they deserve. Both players have led their team out before, Khang beating Linn Grant in 2023, Hull seeing off Nelly Korda in 2024. That experience sees them good as they both pump fine drives down the track. No going back now!
It was a classic matchplay double whammy. An all-timer.Yesterday evening in the gloaming, with Europe looking likely to take a 9-7 lead into the Sunday singles, Jennifer Kupcho tramlined a 90-footer on 17 before guiding in a 30-footer on the last to pull the rug spectacularly, skilfully, nervelessly, dramatically from under the feet of the astonished hosts and level the scores at 8-8. A genuine Where Were You When ...? event, 120 feet's worth of brilliance you'll see again and again and again and again for ever more. And you can double that should the USA win and/or retain the trophy this afternoon! Take it to the bank. Jennifer Kupcho: instant Solheim Cup legend.
Can Europe recover from that late, late, great bodyblow? They've got 12 chances to do so. They need six-and-a-half more points to regain the Solheim Cup; the USA require a mere six to retain. If the first two days are anything to go by - and Carlota Ciganda's Seve-and-Spieth-infused heroics on Friday now seem a sepia-tinged dot in the dim and distant past in this post-Kupcho multicoloured world - this is going to be very tense, very dramatic ... and an awful lot of fun. It's on!
10.10am (BST): Charley Hull v Megan Khang 10:22am: Esther Henseleit v Alison Lee 10:34am: Linn Grant v Angel Yin 10:46am: Mimi Rhodes v Nelly Korda 10:58am: Nanna Koerstz Madsen v Allisen Corpuz 11:10am: Nastasia Nadaud v Andrea Lee 11:22am: Julia López Ramírez v Yealimi Noh 11:34am: Lottie Woad v Auston Kim 11:46am: Leona Maguire v Lauren Coughlin 11:58am: Maja Stark v Lindy Duncan 12:10pm: Carlota Ciganda v Jennifer Kupcho 12:22pm: Celine Boutier v Rose Zhang