In the fullness of time Chelsea's surrender against Brighton & Hove Albion last April may come to be seen as the turning point. The humiliation accelerated Liam Rosenior's demise and forced the Stamford Bridge hierarchy into a reckoning which has led to the appointment of Xabi Alonso, a shift in the transfer strategy, the JP Morgan front three and the end of Robert Sánchez's time as the No 1 goalkeeper.
At the final whistle Álvaro Arbeloa provided a study in pensiveness while Régis Le Bris simply looked relieved.
An almost palpable fear of losing formed the subtext of a match decided when two of the Sunderland manager's second-half substitutes, Habib Diarra and Wilson Isidor, combined for the latter to score.
Leeds United and Brentford continued their unbeaten starts to the Premier League season with a draw that had enough moments to suggest both can be optimistic about what lies ahead.
JP: I think everyone knows his quality, I think, he came to help us. We could see today. Yeah, he's a special player, special keeper.
EM: Yeah, of course, obviously, speaking of legends, of Chelsea, with JT and Petr, I knew how big this club is and what we want to achieve this season. I came I came here to help. I come here to challenge myself and trying to win the Premier League.
JP: I think the game today was a special game for me. I think I help my teammates, I fight until the end, and, yeah, I get it in points, it's very important for us. When I'm not scoring, Cole will be there, or Morgan, so, I think we need to enjoy, and, yeah, hopefully in the end, it can, we can achieve a high, high level.
Actually, they can't. Gross's goal was the last kick of a relentless game where defending took a back seat. Chelsea were great going forward, and so were an injury-hit Brighton. Feels like it's been a while since Chelsea were so much fun to watch but they kick off the season with two wins.
Brentford were brilliant in the first half, and Kevin Schade's goal was a beauty. As is Leeds' way, they stuck at it, and Calvert-Lewin's goal was their reward for that persistence.
Harry Wilson is fouled by Nathan Collins as a loose ball is chased. A yellow card for Collins and a free-kick in a dangerous position for Leeds. Stach whips it, and that's that.
Wilson Isidor's goal won it for the Black Cats, a game where they held Fulham at bay. Fulham have lost both games this season and will rue a lack of cutting edge. Sunderland recover from that loss to Ipswich last week and land a home win at first time of asking.
Brentford making a series of subs, including Callum Wilson coming on to partner Thiago. There was some confusion over the numbers, with Rico Henry another arrival. Both teams making plenty of lunging tackles. There's real fatigue out there.
Into the closing moments here, and Sunderland remain in front, and are defending deep against an opponent yet to have a shot on target all afternoon. They have had 59% of possession. Though, mind, Brighton had 73% of possession at Chelsea and look where that got them. Four minutes added on at the Stadium of Light.
The change in weather conditions - see the pics from the Leeds Festival - have allowed Daniel Farke to resume wearing his signature black raincoat. His team look the likelier here. Brentford paying for all that first-half effort, and their lack of profit from it.
Lukas Nmecha was the player whose drilling of the ball was knocked in by Calvert-Lewin. At the other end, Igor Thiago drifts a header in but Brentford will not retake the lead with that.
This season's entertainers would appear to be Chelsea. Though Brighton are having a good go, too. Kadioglu volleys wide. Chelsea still giving up plenty of chances though so full of firepower.
Breathing space secured in some style, as Palmer comes in from the right, blazing past Wieffer, and lashing home with his left foot. A fine goal, and a sigh of relief.
Having missed a golden chance, Isidor kept his cool to score, with Fulham's high line breached, a fine cross from Habib Diarra. Those subs from Regis Le Bris pay huge dividends.
Justin forces a save from Kelleher as Leeds look for a way back when they might already have lost the game. Brentford have a habit of failing to kill off their opponents.
Diego Gomez went close almost immediately after that own-goal. Chelsea suddenly looking something of a rabble, and changes are made, including the arrival of Moises Caicedo and Reece James.
Harry Wilson on the burst, in the territory from where he scored those spectacular goals for Fulham but he decides to play in Jayden Bogle, and it doesn't come to much.
Ooof! Diego Gomez should have scored. What a ball that was from Boscagli, and what a miss that was. Gomez has an eye for a goal, and miss, too. At the other end, both Neto and Cole Palmer go close for Chelsea.
Good noise at the Stadium of Light, and applause for Mukiele's tackle, when Gonzalo Garcia is robbed, just when Josh King's ball had sent the striker clean away. Palacios smashes over but Fulham look better.
Brighton begin the half with possession. Chelsea are full of counterattacking speed, as you might expect from a Xabi Alonso team. At the Bridge, the officials have lost their electronic communications and are having to employ the analogue techniques of hand signals and shouting.
Daniel Farke has made two changes, and really needed to. Harry Wilson and Ao Tanaka replace Brenden Aaronson and Jaka Bijol, in the aim of adding attacking zest and added numbers in midfield.
Brentford have continued their brilliant start to the season and might be more than a single goal up, though what a goal it was from Kevin Schade. His was a superb improvised finish.
The attacking from Chelsea has been red-hot, and after Romeo Lavia scored early they settled into a groove that Brighton struggled with. Xabi Alonso's first home has got off to a good start.
A Gross cross comes in and Gomez can only head over. Brighton, with so many players out, are not done here. Chelsea's defence needs some work; what will the window bring?
Eric Pietersen gets in touch: "I wonder how much of the quick pace that's caught your eye is teams realizing what a waste of time possession becomes if your opponent has time to set up their low block.
"If you're reduced to passes around the block's perimeter, with hopeful crosses into a crowded box and threading the needle to a cutter your only positive attacking options, possession becomes its own liability.
I see teams dawdling on the ball less and less once they get it, and I think it's great. To paraphrase the beloved Kevin Keegan, if all teams treat possession as the fragile commodity with a very short useful shelf life that it seems to be in the modern day, I will love it. Love it."