Thank you for joining me on a very satisfying afternoon for the Wallabies. I'll leave you with Angus Fontaine's match report and see you back here soon.
That is the first time Australia have won three matches in a row since 2024. It may only be Italy and Japan, but the foundations are nonetheless being laid.
It was another match that demonstrated that Australia's best is very very good. The set-piece attack is devastating, the commitment to counterattacking footy is admirable, and when there's discipline the breakdown power is a match for anyone in the world.
Game management and decision making remains problematic, but with the game in the balance after half-time Japan simply ran out of gas and were unable to back their hosts into a corner.
Carter Gordon didn't run the game from flyhalf but he demonstrated enough on his recall to show he should be the playmaker backed to take Australia to the 2027 World Cup. Other notable performances from players with points to prove included Isaac Henry on his first start in the centres, turnover machine Carlo Tizzano in the back row, and the rangy Charlie Cale who was a menace at the lineout and damaging in broken field.
The Wallabies will be very very happy with their afternoon's work in Townsville. Japan wilted after half-time while Australia were full of running, clinical near the line, crisp at set-pieces, and increasingly brutal at the breakdown.
78 mins: The Wallabies attack off the back of a scrum in their own half. Donaldson chips and chases with the penalty advantage, but it comes to nought.
The Wallabies are carving through Japan at will now. Cale breaks the gainline twice, as does McDermott. Australia soon find themselves camped in the right corner with a penalty advantage. The pick-and-go drives begin, a couple are repelled, but Wilson will not be denied from a matter of inches.
Japan are cooked. The Wallabies drive the 10m scrum almost unopposed through the front door until Cale almost apologetically touches down. That was brutal route one stuff.
72 mins: The Wallabies drive a slow maul into Japan's 22 but they lose connection with the backs as they try to release the ball. Japan try to run the ball out of their own red zone but a long spiral pass is grassed under pressure. After three excellent halves of Test rugby the Brave Blossoms are starting to wilt.
70 mins: Japan run the ball from behind the 5m scrum and canter down the right flank into Australia's half. But yet again the visitors are demolished at the breakdown, this time McReight receiving back pats for his turnover execution.
69 mins: The lineout is quick and shifted immediately infield before the gold jerseys are hauled down inches from the line. But for the first time today the script is flipped with Australia's forwards unable to convert the pick-and-go score with a knock-on identified on the ground.
68 mins: McDermott does well to hold onto a difficult lineout tap then wriggle through traffic to set up an attacking platform. The ruck play is sharp, Williams has room near the right corner, he offloads to McDermott who must surely score - but he fumbles! Play is recalled to an earlier advantage which is kicked to the right corner.
67 mins: Leitch returns the dropout as Japan try to get some energy into their phase play but Australia are absolutely monstering the breakdown, Paenga-Amosa the latest forward to add a turnover to his stats sheet.
63 mins: Japan grind their way through some phase play off a lineout on the right. Ito and Saito have been denied the space they exploited last weekend and it's no surprise when Tizzano secures his third turnover penalty of the day as the visitors tread water.
CONVERTED TRY! Australia 35-17 Japan (De Lutiis, 59)
Wilson steamrolls into the defensive line off the lineout. Lonergan sends up a bomb that Jorgensen chases, causing havoc. The ball ricochets the Wallabies' way and Gordon relishes the broken field, streaking toward the right corner. He's hauled down inches from the line, which means a guaranteed score from an Australian front-rower, right? And this time it's Wallaby 1,000 De Lutiis, on debut, who gets the dream start to his Test career!
57 mins: Henry does well to hold on in midfield as he accepts a hospital pass off the back of the lineout. The Wallabies are lacking fluency in the backs, conceding ground and missing connections repeatedly. Gordon is out of position, Bell fumbles, what is going on? This is a shambolic phase of play that is mercifully ended by Wright kicking deep. After some kicking exchanges Japan belt into touch just beyond halfway.
55 mins: A rare poor lineout from the Wallabies and Japan counter in broken field - until Tizzano locks down another ruck and earns the referee's whistle. That is his second clean tackle-breakdown penalty of the match.
53 mins: Hockings pilfers the restart, Leitch grinds inside attacking 22, but Japan can't build any momentum as Williams gets over the ball at the ruck and wins the penalty.
The lineout is superb, Gordon hits the defensive line at pace, and from inches Australia's front row are unstoppable. This time it's Bell who has the honour of touching down and accepting the plaudits.
50 mins: Lonergan goes to the skies early in the drive and Jorgensen again reels it in. The Wallabies build some phase play into the 22 but it's all a bit scrappy and the referee is happy to recall play to an earlier advantage. This allows De Lutiis the opportunity to rumble onto the field and become Wallaby 1,000.
49 mins: Australia do their job at the set piece, Lonergan kicks a towering bomb that causes havoc on its descent but bounces Japan's way. The visiting tight five get to work, making marginal gains down the right, bludgeoning their work into attacking territory. Eventually the ball is spun wide but the home defence is well set and moves up as one, smothering Kida and forcing the turnover.
47 mins: The second effort becomes a Japan free-kick and the ball is quickly spun to the left wing. The Brave Blossoms reset and head back infield where there's some loose handling that isn't called as a knock-on. Eventually a crossfield kick dribbles into touch at the 22.
44 mins: Momentum quickly stalls and Potter ends up running about 30m crossfield before the Wallabies reset. The ball goes through hands to the left where Wright puts a beautiful step to create room on the outside and he has thoughts of a try in the corner until he's hauled down just a few yards from the line. He then concedes a penalty on the floor and the visitors breathe a sigh of relief.
42 mins: Much cleaner lineout from Japan who attack off the left with Saito busy before Ito dabs a grubber to the right corner. Australia take a quick unopposed lineout and run the ball bravely to the 22 where Lonergan box kicks. Jorgensen steams through, takes the contested mark and streaks to attacking 22!
The lineout is solid, the maul forms but Japan hold it steady. The ball comes out to Paisami to hit the line. With penalty advantage the Wallabies go through the phases near the uprights. Wilson leads the charge, Paisami creates width, and Tupou is there again like a charging rhino to score his second of the day - from a combined two metres!
37 mins: Another spoiled lineout! Australia succeed at the set piece and get to work infield where Tupou is tackled without the ball. Gordon kicks the penalty to the left corner. This is exactly where this iteration of the Wallabies love to be.