The scoreboard did not yet indicate that anything was awry, but even as Novak Djokovic led by a set in his opening match at the Cincinnati Open, he was already struggling badly.
From the second set onwards, he spent much of his time between points squatting and bending over as he desperately tried to catch his breath in the notorious Ohioan humidity. He was eventually dispatched 2-6, 6-4, 6-4 by Thiago Agustín Tirante of Argentina, who took this golden opportunity to register the biggest win of his career.
After more than a decade of dominating his sport regardless of terrain, early losses for Djokovic at the non-slam events have become increasingly familiar. The 39-year-old has long insisted that, at such an advanced age, the grand slam tournaments and Olympics are his priority. His results have reflected this reality.
While Djokovic reached the Australian Open final and he returned to the semi-final of Wimbledon last month, this was just his third non-grand slam tournament of the season. He has failed to reach the quarter-finals in any of those tournaments, compiling a 2-3 record across his appearances at Indian Wells, Rome and Cincinnati.
Early on, Djokovic seemed to be well on his way to a straightforward win as he rolled through the opening set without a problem. However, he began to wilt in the humidity from early in the second set. He called for the physio and doctor while leading 6-2, 2-1, where he vomited into a towel before having his blood pressure checked. He continued to move at half-speed for most of the match. "It was not an enjoyable match for me, for sure, the way I felt," Djokovic said. "Not the first, I guess, not the last time, but it is what it is."
While Djokovic crumbled, Tirante remained strong throughout. The 25-year-old Argentinian is one of the biggest servers in the world, and he used his serve and potent forehand well to force an already uncomfortable Djokovic behind the baseline before closing out a victory. Incredibly, the world No 50 now holds a 4-1 record against top 10 opponents.
After his defeat, Djokovic walked directly from the court to his media conference, where he briefly explained his struggles with humidity. "It's just the condition that I have health-wise," he said. "It's been bothering me for the last couple of years. And a lot of issues, especially when it's humid and hot. Yeah."
Djokovic said he had anticipated a difficult day but tension and pressure of matchplay had naturally made things worse. "Yeah, I did, but it is all these things ... nerves and everything involved makes it worse. So that's what happened."
Asked if he believes he will return to Cincinnati, Djokovic responded: "I certainly hope so, but it looks more likely not, unfortunately. But let's see what the future brings."
Djokovic's preparation for this tournament had been preceded by a promotional tour for his upcoming Amazon Prime documentary, with the Serb spending time in the United States during the World Cup before setting his sights on the final weeks of the North American hard court swing.
He explained before the tournament that he had decided to compete in Cincinnati in order to give himself some matches before the US Open. Instead, he again faces the challenge of finding his feet quickly in New York as he attempts to continue his excellent results at the grand slam tournaments, where he has reached the semi-final or better in six of his last seven appearances.
Elsewhere, Arthur Fery made a positive start to his first ever appearance in the Cincinnati Open main draw as the Briton held his nerve at the end of an incredibly tight tussle to defeat James Duckworth 6-4, 2-6, 7-6 (4) and reach the third round.
Fery had opted to take four weeks off after Wimbledon, meaning this was his first match since his run to the semi-finals at the All England Club, a result that has changed the trajectory of his career. He had never previously won a Masters 1000 main draw match and this was his first ever direct appearance at this level, despite being seeded.
It required an immense fight for the 32nd seed to drag himself over the line. He began well, taking the ball early dictating from inside the baseline, before his level dropped and he quickly found himself in a final set. Both players comfortably held serve in set three until the tie-break, where the Australian Duckworth made the first move to lead 4-3 with a mini-break. Fery responded brilliantly, lasering two excellent, deep returns in succession to reach 5-4 before serving extremely well to close out the match.
An even greater challenge awaits Fery in round three as he faces the fifth seed, Alex de Minaur. The Australian, who has been struggling to find his form recently, recovered from a set down to defeat the French qualifier Quentin Halys 1-6, 6-3, 7-6 (4).