That, then, is us done for today. It seems a long time ago we started, because it was, which is another way of saying it's been a lot of fun ... and we'll see you again tomorrow. But until then, peace out.
Back with the high jump, Jack of England has one more shot at 2.25 ... and he cant get over. Thus he must settle for bronze, with Kushare and Beckford left to contest the gold.
I can't pretend our men's 110m hurdles final is the highest standard, but it should be a good race; Samuel Bennett of England will fancy himself for gold, but Demario Prince of Jamaica and Milan Trajkovic of Cyprus will have thoughts in that regard too.
We've not been shown anything of the men's high jump final, but Romaine Beckford of Jamaica leads with 2.25m; Sarvesh Kusha of India is second on the same mark, with Kimani Jack of England third on 2.20.
Was Bryce moving wide a plan? I think it may have been because it allowed Sandilands to keep the inside track, and as soon as it happened the race was over.
Ethan Katzberg still leads in the men's hammer with 80.97, hurls his final effort, and it's pretty close to his own mark ... but not quite, I don't think. Still, he's all over this event, a dominant force miles ahead of the competition.
In the 1500m, we've got three Scots, two of whom are Olympic champions - Ben Sandilands won in Paris and Owen Miller in Tokyo. The third of the trio is Steven Bryce, and they train together in Fife; I can't wait to see how things shake out.
Beamish is tailing off! The three Kenyans lead, then Desgagnes of Canada some way behind, with a gap behind him, and it looks like the medals are decided, just not who gets which.
Time for the men's 3000m steeplechase final, with Geordie Beamish of New Zealand, the reigning world champion, looking to become the first non-Kenyan to win since 1982.
Davies says it was a funny race so she tried to stay calm, not do anything silly and be there for the finish. She wasn't expecting to lead from 600m out, but she's glad she did. Tahe last 10m, though, she felt safe, and she's "stoked".
In the men's 800m free final, Sam Short of Australia, the 400m champ, leads by a distance at halfway, with Benjamin Goedemans second and Daniel Wiffen of Northern Ireland third.
Oh man, that's got the eyeballs leaking. We've not a clue what our competitors have invested in making it to here, but we know it's more than we can comprehend.
A tearful Whiston says it's been a very long journey and her dad's just been diagnosed with Parkinson's, so she wanted to make him proud - this race was for him. She didn't see him on the way round, and "sport isn't just about us, it's about the community behind us."
She loves pushing her body to see what it can do and now she wants to cheer on Team England. A school teacher, she thinks her kids will enjoy it and she's really looking forward to watching it back with them.
Davies ran a near-perfect tactical race there, taking advantage of the slow start to kick with plenty in hand, easily taking out Mwangi and driving it home.