39th over: England 156-4 (Brook 52, Lawrence 5) Brook, coping better with Abbas than he was five minutes ago, reverts to his trusty flick for two. And that is stumps, with England 23 ahead.
The three seamers who have shredded Pakistan, Messrs Robinson, Archer and Tongue, shot them out for 133 in the shortest innings of this series, which is saying something. When England subsided to 39-3, honours were even and Pakistan had even found a young star in Razaullah, who shot out Joe Root in his first over as a Test cricketer. But then Harry Brook joined Emilio Gay to put together a partnership of 104, which is worth about 200 in a low-scoring series.
Mohammad Abbas has been magnificent again, the old boy stood on the burning deck. But this Test already seems to be going the same way as the first two. Thanks for your company and correspondence. Rob Smyth will be with you in the morning and Ali Martin's match report will be here soon. For now, do join Scott Murray to see how Mikel Arteta gets on as he bumps into Antonio Conte again.
38th over: England 154-4 (Brook 50, Lawrence 5) Lawrence steps across his stumps, exposing his toes to the Waqar-esque Razaullah, but it works as he plays a sharp-eyed whip for three. Brook then hits an uppish pull for a single, which is enough to bring up his fifty off 70 balls. It's his 30th fifty in 41 Tests and his seventh in nine Tests against Pakistan. Now he needs to get the hundred that eluded Gay.
37th over: England 150-4 (Brook 49, Lawrence 2) Mohammad Abbas, still bowling with the keeper up to the stumps, thinks he's got Brook LBW. Nasser Hussain thinks he heard two noises. Babar reviews but Nasser is soon proved right. Abbas beats Brook outside off, then beats him again! And again!! (Though the third one turns out to be a no-ball.)
Harry Brook, a world-class batter with his eye in, has edged two balls in this over and missed three. Fabulous stuff from Abbas.
36th over: England 149-4 (Brook 49, Lawrence 2) Razaullah, radiating confidence, draws a leading edge from Brook and a play-and-a-miss from Dan Lawrence.
Here's Gary Naylor, picking up on Alasdair Gould's remarks from the 22nd over. "It's often said that you can't compare eras in sport," Gary begins, "but you can when it comes to bowling.
"For fast bowling, just see how far back Deryck Murray stood to Michael Holding and Wayne Daniel when Brian Close wore a few 50 years ago. Watch the ball swing late and you understand Waqar's infamous toecrusher. Before SK Warne's injury, the spin and bounce he got off the pitch away from footmarks was extravagant.
"Fielding is, of course, unrecognisably better today. With batting, it's hard to tell, but it certainly took real cojones to get behind the line in the age before body armour and helmets."
35th over: England 148-4 (Brook 48, Lawrence 2) Brook clips Abbas away for his umpteenth two. Abbas, with Ghazi standing up to the stumps, retorts by beating Brook with a beauty outside off. The commentators keep saying it's a good pitch for batting, but it's a good one for bowling too.
34th over: England 144-4 (Brook 45, Lawrence 1) Razaullah reportedly longed to be a cricketer as a boy but was told by his dad - who has eight other kids - that it was out of the question. After he'd captained his school teams for five years in a row, his dad wisely relented. His chances of captaining Pakistan, at this moment, look quite good.
33rd over: England 139-3 (Gay 56, Brook 45) Gay works Abbas to midwicket, where a misfield, not the first, allows him to take three. Brook adds a wristy flick for two to bring up the 100 partnership off 21 overs. They've both been positive in their very different ways.
Pakistan's highest partnership was 26 (for the last wicket). Another Test is turning into a non-contest.
32nd over: England 134-3 (Gay 53, Brook 43) Babar Azam makes a double change, bringing back Razaullah, who provided the moment of the day by defeating Joe Root in his first over as a Test cricketer. Brook flicks for two and digs out a yorker to level the scores; Gay adds a mistimed pull for a single, so, in the 66th over of the day, England have already taken the lead.
31st over: England 129-3 (Gay 52, Brook 40) Back comes Mohammad Abbas, the man you call when you need to put the plug in. It works as Gay takes only a single, and plays and misses at a ball that's far too good to take a wicket.
30th over: England 128-3 (Gay 51, Brook 40) Hang on, Gay may be matching Brook's tempo! Facing Ali, he dabs for four, cuts the next ball for four more and that's his fifty - 50 off 95 balls with eight fours. He's recovered well from a sketchy start, moved through the gears, and almost seen England to parity.
29th over: England 116-3 (Gay 40, Brook 40) Babar gives Mohammad Imran a sixth over, which goes for two singles and two byes. Meanwhile I've been doing some research on the firm of Gay & Brook. In the first four Tests of the summer, they didn't bat together; at Lord's, they added 23 in the second innings, when they both got 30-odd. So this partnership, now 77, is their first big one.
28th over: England 112-3 (Gay 39, Brook 39) Why is batting like dancing? Because it's all about being light on your feet and keeping your balance. Why is it different? When you dance with someone, you have to be in time with each other. When you bat with someone, you don't. Brook has been breezing along at a run a ball, Gay labouring at a run every two balls, but that makes a good partnership - contrasting styles, contrasting fields, bowlers having to play two different games in the same over.
27th over: England 111-3 (Gay 39, Brook 38) No change at the other end either as Mohammad Imran continues. He's neither all that young (29) nor all that good, to go by his first-class average (nearly 35), or his white-ball averages (33 and 32), but he's been decent here and now he beats Gay outside off.
26th over: England 107-3 (Gay 39, Brook 37) Brook starts this half-session with a comfy single to backward point off Mohammad Ali. Gay tucks the next ball for an even comfier two. Come on Pakistan, this is your chance! Three more wickets and you're down to the tail. No more wickets tonight and you're heading for a whitewash.
25th over: England 104-3 (Gay 37, Brook 36) The keeper, Ghazi Ghori, comes up to the stumps, not for the first time in this innings, but for the first time with Mohammad Imran bowling. It's just for Brook, who flicks a single, unperturbed. As Ghori retreats, Gay plays a tuck for four. Ghori comes up again for the last ball, which Gay comfortably ignores.
That big score is beckoning to him, but the old pros in the commentary box are tut-tutting about his running between the wickets. "Someone needs to have a word," says Ian Ward. "Run your bat in!"
24th over: England 97-3 (Gay 32, Brook 35) A single to each batter as Mohammad Ali continues. Pakistan cricket is often described as a soap opera, but this attack is almost a rom-com: Three Mohammads and a Razaullah.
23rd over: England 95-3 (Gay 31, Brook 34) Brook can't see a good ball without wanting to hit it for four. Gay, on the other hand, waits for the bad ball. Mohammad Imran dishes one up now, a half-volley outside off, and Gay caresses it to the Toblerone. But that's the first four Imran has conceded and the rest of the over is all dots. He's made a steady start to his Test career: 3-1-7-0.
22nd over: England 91-3 (Gay 27, Brook 34) Babar Azam, seeing the need to give Razaullah a breather, brings back Mohammad Ali. "I think there is a lot of unreal nostalgia about cricketers and cricket in the past," says Alisdair Gould. "If you watch video of previous decades before 2000, the batsmen make more extravagant footwork. This makes me think: 1 bowling is faster, 2 bats are bigger, 3 the game moves more quickly now. With the heavy bats and split second decisions, players with a good hand to eye coordination score OK, until it suddenly starts failing. Brook is one such cavalier."
Right on cue, Brook hurls his hands into a square drive and picks up another four. When Ali over-corrects, he glances for four more. And the partnership passes fifty - 52 off 10.1 overs.
21st over: England 83-3 (Gay 27, Brook 26) Just a bye off Mohammad Imran's second over. All four seamers have bowled well. Pakistan's problem, at the risk of stating the obvious, is that they have so few runs in the bank. This partnership (44) is already the highest of the day, putting the 26 by Mohammad Abbas and Mohammad Ali in the shade. And the lead is a flimsy 50.
20th over: England 82-3 (Gay 27, Brook 26) Razaullah looks as if he's going to keep on leaking runs as Brook flicks for a single and Gay plays a Cook-ish square drive for four. But then he finds the good length that featured in his first over, reels off four dots and almost has Gay caught behind. He looks the part, too: Mohammad Imran may be the one with the famous name, but there's a touch of Imran Khan in the way Razaullah carrie shimself. If only Imran was here to see it.
19th over: England 77-3 (Gay 23, Brook 25) I don't believe it. Mohammad Abbas is HAVING A REST. So, for now, it's debutants at both ends. And Mohammad Imran almost takes a wicket with his first ball in Test cricket! It's not as short as Brook thought and his under-edged cut very nearly leaves him playing on. Recovering his poise, Brook plays a dab for three, but it's a pretty good start from Imran.
18th over: England 74-3 (Gay 23, Brook 22) After a sedate start by his standards, Harry Brook decides it's time is for the counter-attack. He takes on Razaullah, whipping a full ball for four, pulling a long hop for four more, and adding an off-drive for three to motor to 22 off 22 balls. Gay, taking the hint, joins in with a steer for four past backward point. Fifteen off the over!
17th over: England 59-3 (Gay 19, Brook 11) Mo Abbas is still bowling. If that custard cream has worn off by now, he may be energised by the second coming of Waqar Younis at the other end. But it feels like one over too many as Brook clips for two and a single, and Gay punches past cover for his second boundary.
16th over: England 52-3 (Gay 15, Brook 8) As Razaullah continues, Gay again flirts with a run-out, but this time the shy misses and he ends up collecting three. Brook, more assured, picks up a couple of singles in the midwicket region.
15th over: England 47-3 (Gay 12, Brook 6) Brook, facing Abbas, plays his first Brookish shot, a crisp cut for three.
"Feedback on the Guardian cricket minute by minute page," says Will. This doesn't sound good. "The problem is that it is too slow - I just checked the score on Google and England are 39-3. The Guardian still shows the score as 39-2. And this is not a one-off. The BBC is also much quicker. Also, why does the Guardian keep showing wickets taken by the Pakistan bowler Muhammad Ali on the scorecard as 'Dazy'? I don't understand."
Nor do I! The Guardian has a long and distinguished tradition of typos, but that doesn't quite seem to account for turning Ali into Dazy. Maybe it's Mohammad Ali's third name?
The scorecard is automated, though I hasten to add that it might not be much better if we writers were in charge of it. You pay no money and you take your choice!
14th over: England 44-3 (Gay 12, Brook 3) After removing Root with his fifth ball, Razaullah drew an edge from Harry Brook with his sixth. Now, with his seventh, he floors Emilio Gay, who jabs down on a yorker and gets an inside edge into his knee. Ouch! Gay recovers to take a calm single but with his ninth ball, Razaullah nearly provokes a run-out, as Brook plays tip-and-run and Gay almost perishes to a direct hit from Shan Masood in the covers. It's all happening!
13th over: England 42-3 (Gay 11, Brook 2) The indefatigable Abbas is still at it, restricting each batter to a single. He has a characteristic set of figures: 7-1-14-1.
12th over: England 40-3 (Gay 10, Brook 1) Say what you like about the Pakistan selectors, they've made a difference here. Razaullah has taken to Test cricket like a duck to a Pakistan scorecard. With a slingy action, an impeccable length and 90mph on the speed gun, he beat Root on his inside edge and made it look easy.
11th over: England 39-2 (Gay 10, Root 8) Mo Abbas continues, possibly fortified by a custard cream. His first ball after tea beats the bat of Emilio Gay, who needs a big score here to book his ticket for South Africa. It doesn't have to be a hundred: when your opponents only manage 130, 60 or 70 becomes a big score. By the end of the over, Gay is into double figures with a handsome cover drive. That's his first boundary today in 32 balls faced.
Fun fact. England's bowling averages in this series, to the nearest whole number: Ollie Robinson 7, Josh Tongue 12, Jofra Archer 18, Gus Atkinson 156. Sometimes, it's an unfunny game. More details here.
10th over: England 35-2 (Gay 6, Root 8) Better from Ali, keeping Root quiet even with the keeper standing back. Root looks uneasy and seems to be talking to himself, but he makes it through to tea.
Can we say that session belonged to Pakistan? Not quite, but much of it belonged to Mohammad Abbas and Mohammad Ali. They put together the highest partnership of the day so far, a mighty 26, and then took a wicket apiece to keep the contest even for now.
"Ghazi Ghori's wonderful name encapsulates Pakistan's first innings," says Colum Fordham, who knows a bit about nominative determinism. "It was worthy of a horror flick, a truly Ghori spectacle. Having said that, England's batsmen appear to be doing their level best to emulate their opponents."
9th over: England 35-2 (Gay 6, Root 8) Better from Gay, steering Abbas for two behind square. He has six off 26 balls while his three partners between them have collected 23 off 29. But then two of them are toast, and he is not.
8th over: England 32-2 (Gay 4, Root 7) Ali continues and struggles with his line, peppering the pads. Both batters respond in characteristic fashion: Gay manages a single with a glance to fine leg, then Root clips for two and on-drives for three. Even in a thin and testing summer, Root has hung onto his confidence.
7th over: England 26-2 (Gay 3, Root 2) That is exactly the way Joe Root has been getting out lately - eight LBWs in his last 11 innings. Now he starts well, with a punchy push into the covers for two, but is soon playing and missing. Nasser Hussain, in the commentary box, spots Root staying legside to avoid the LBW. The danger is that he then nicks off: there are three slips and a gully waiting behind the new keeper, the excellently named Ghazi Ghori.
The keeper comes up to the stumps, and that does the trick! Cox, pinned in his crease, plays outside the nip-backer, and then makes matters worse with a doomed review. Is he Joe Root in disguise?
6th over: England 24-1 (Gay 3, Cox 4) Cox begins Mohammad Ali's over with a sliced square drive for two and a push for a single. Gay rounds it off with a steer into the covers for two. In between Ali tests Gay with a bouncer, given as a wide on grounds of height.
5th over: England 18-1 (Gay 1, Cox 1) In comes Jordan Cox, bearing a sense of purpose. He begins by getting his partner off the mark, calling Gay for a quick single. Next, facing his first ball, Cox sends Gay back as he looks for a leg-bye, but the throw goes for overthrows anyway, so that's four leg-byes. Then Cox takes a single. And Gay gets squared up by Abbas, as he has been a few times. Well as Gay did with that composed fifty on his debut, Cox has mostly looked far more at home in Test cricket.
WICKET! Duckett c Babar b Mohammad Ali 11 (England 12-1)
The breakthrough! After being hit for two fours in the over, Mohammad Ali fights back with a tempting half-volley. Duckett chases it and gives a simple catch to second slip.
2nd over: England 3-0 (Duckett 3, Gay 0) Mohammad Ali shares the new ball, as expected, given that the other two seamers are debutants. Duckett plays an off-drive that looks good but turns out to be mistimed, going for two not four. Attempting a repeat, Duckett plays at thin air.
Meanwhile, Simon Burnton has filed a story you couldn't make up.
1st over: England 1-0 (Duckett 1, Gay 0) Duckett dropped two catches earlier at first slip before managing to cling onto one. His innings gets off to a less eventful start with a push into the covers for a single. Abbas then beats Gay, but on the inside edge, not the outside one.