That's all from me today as we approach half-time across the grounds but fear not, Barry Glendenning is helming the clockwatch, where he will bring you more goals from across the EFL and later, the Premier League.
Thanks for tuning in and join us for tomorrow's matchday live.
Derby 1-0 Birmingham: Sam Szmodics gets the ball after Carlton Morris nods it his way and he plays in Bobby Clark who finds space at the near post to fire it in.
West Brom 0-1 QPR: Another own goal, this one a lot worse, I think. Rumarn Burrell is through on goal but is denied as the ball is parried away but it hits Chris Mepham in the face and into the net.
Crawley 1-1 Cheltenham: All square after Charlie McCann plays a corner short to Joe Tomlinson; his shot comes off a defender and straight to McCann and he sends a first-time finish into the corner. That is his fifth goal in six league games.
West Brom 0-0 QPR: The hosts can return to the top of the Championship with a win today but it has been a quiet one so far - they win their first corner of the game but it is punched away by Pierce Charles.
Championship: Goalless in all three games so far. Bolton are constantly on the break against Cardiff, the latest is snuffed out after Gabriel Osho slides in with a tackle and wins the ball back.
Grimsby 1-0 Bristol Rovers: Kieran Green peels off the back of his defender and pokes the ball in for the hosts after David Harrington pings a ball over the top.
Crawley 1-0 Cheltenham: The hosts lead after some good work down the right side. A low cross from Osman Kamara comes in and Dylan Morgan finishes it off with a nice side of the boot finish.
Our Manchester football correspondent has the news on what's happening off the pitch as United's home supporters are expected to protest their club's drive against ticket touts.
Febrile Manchester derby awaits amid growing rift between United fans and club
A United victory would send those of the red persuasion home happy, bragging rights secured in the workplace and local hostelries. But an underlying discontent will remain: at the longstanding grievance regarding the Glazers' ownership that has haemorrhaged resources and saddled the club with a near £1.3bn debt, and at the recent initiative designed to eliminate the black market resale of tickets.
It is a worthy act but the accusation from fans is of a draconian approach. In July United began contacting supporters who used six or more devices to access accounts linked to the club or to forward tickets, on the basis this suggested the potential buying of seats to resell. Those in question were asked why multiple accounts were accessed, to identify the differing devices used, and for photo ID to prove validity.
Manchester derbies have always had moments where tempers flared and heads were lost. But United's Lisandro Martínez has called for cool heads and humility against Manchester City as the Manchester United defender prepares to resume battle with Erling Haaland.
City look to be in a stronger spot heading into the derby, having won their first three Premier League matches and opened their Champions League campaign with a win away to Porto on Tuesday.
United's start has been patchier, with Carrick's side collecting four points from a possible nine before making a morale-boosting return to European football's top competition as Sabah were dispatched 4-0 on Thursday.
"I'm happy with the performance and with the clean sheet," Martínez said after his goal wrapped up victory. "I'm a defender and if I score it's good, if I don't score it doesn't matter. For me, it's important to get the three points and winning and playing good football, that's the most important for me and that's it.
"For sure when you win your confidence is going up, you know, but now we have to be calm, we have to be humble and enjoy, and then we have to think about the derby that is really important for us."
Martínez impressed in United's derby triumph eight months ago, when the 5ft 9in defender won a duel with the towering Haaland that was highlighted in the buildup by club greats Paul Scholes and Nicky Butt.
The latter joked the City striker "would pick Martínez up and run with him" like a "dad after school running down the road with a little toddler" before Scholes laughed and said that "he'd score then throw him in the net".
When that impressive display against Haaland was put to him, the Argentina international said: "Yeah, but that is the past. It's the past, you know, it's gone and now we have to, I have to be ready for this game because it's going to be so different than the last one." Press Association
Our data visual journalist has been analysing Manchester City's squad, which used to be a model of stability under Pep Guardiola but many of the group Enzo Maresca oversees are recent recruits.
All change for Maresca: the data behind Manchester City's rapid player turnover
Rayan Cherki was the fifth-longest-serving player and he joined the club last summer. Only one of the five men in the key defensive positions of goalkeeper, centre-back or holding midfield was a City player when the 2025-26 season began. It would have been different had Enzo Fernández not needed to start in place of Nico O'Reilly, who was injured in the warm-up, but not by much.
Here is one way we can attempt to quantify turnover within a squad. With 11 men playing 90 minutes for 38 games, a club's Premier League campaign consists of 37,620 player minutes. There are players who covered 13,998 minutes for City in 2025-26 who have not appeared for them in the league this season, and most of them will not because they have left. This means that 37.2% of the club's minutes need replacing - this is their turnover rate.
Across Guardiola's 10 seasons, this figure averaged 14.5% and was no higher than 7.5% four times. Almost everyone who contributed significant playing time in a given season would do so the following season. There was a seven-season period of supreme stability in the middle of Guardiola's tenure, though the current squad evolution had begun in his final campaign.
Thanks Tom and hello all.Earlier we looked at David Hytner's piece on Kobbie Mainoo's influence and what he can bring to Manchester United during the derby on Sunday. But what about the blue side of Manchester?
London City Lionesses XI: Lete, Thomsen, Kardinaal, Leon, Pattinson, Geyoro, Kennedy, Godfrey, Putellas, Kafaji, van de Donk. Subs: Earps, Fernandez, Perez, Linari, Arques, Parris, Cascarino, Diani, Goodwin.
A first start of the season for England international Freya Godfrey, who replaces Delphine Cascarino in the London City side. West Ham change things up after losing to Spurs with Kelly Gago, Eva Nyström and Inès Belloumou all coming into the team.
Richarlison's proposed move to Vasco da Gama is off and the forward is expected to remain at Tottenham until January.
Spurs made clear to the Brazilian forward in advance of the transfer window in England closing that he was not part of the first-team plans for this season. However, Richarlison failed to finalise a return to former club Everton before deadline day on 1 September and after he was left out of Tottenham's 25-man Premier League squad last week, a potential transfer to Vasco has fallen through.
Roberto De Zerbi started Richarlison during the club's league opener at Brentford, but claimed last Friday that the 29-year-old "decided everything alone" following his squad list absence.
With the Turkish and Saudi Arabian transfer windows closing without Richarlison landing a move, combined with Spurs using up their six overseas loan spots, one of the few remaining options for the striker was a permanent move back to Brazil.
Boyhood club Vasco emerged as a realistic solution and agreed a fee with Tottenham on Friday, but Richarlison failed to agree personal terms.
With the transfer window in Brazil now closed, Richarlison is expected to stick around at Spurs for the first half of the season - even though he cannot play in the Premier League.
Asked for the latest on Richarlison during Friday's press conference, De Zerbi said: "I don't know.
"It's not my job. What I can say is I know very well what the club has done for Richarlison and I know very well what Richarlison has done for the club in the last month, two months.
"I know, the club knows, he knows, his agent knows. Everyone knows better than you (the media)."
Richarlison was reportedly this week trying to explore whether the final nine months of his contract at Spurs could be terminated. Press Association
What can halt Fifa's authoritarian turn under Infantino? Change from the outside
The 2026 World Cup was a whirling swirl of scintillating soccer that prompted much-needed conversations about the vitality of diaspora, the fortitude of the underdog, the power of sport. In a world fractured along myriad cultural axes floating in an entertainment system dominated by on-demand content, the tournament provided a moment, perhaps unlike any other event, that brought together people from different backgrounds to simultaneously experience something meaningful.
After the tournament concluded, Fifa president Gianni Infantino dropped a political pipebomb into the after-party, proposing to privatize the World Cup by injecting $20bn in private capital, with an assist from JP Morgan and Thrive Capital, the investment vehicle orchestrated by Joshua Kushner, brother to Jared Kushner, Donald Trump's son-in-law.
Turns out, Infantino hadn't just been sucking up to Trump the whole time - from hand-delivering the confected Fifa peace prize to obliging him with the red card reversal heard 'round the world - ostensibly to ensure the World Cup money spigot remained winched wide open. Apparently, Infantino was also studying Trump's nepotism-flecked smash-and-grab techniques.
The World Cup and its aftermath made clear that Fifa needs independent oversight by governments and NGOs dedicated to preserving the people's game, writes Jules Boykoff:
Email from Dave Estherby: "I think United's main objective tomorrow is a clean sheet to be honest. Strange transfer window; Tielemans is a solid buy and at least we haven't seen £100m+ spaffed on anither 'superstar' (Garnacho, Antony, Hoijland, Zirkzee etc, even Pogba to be honest) but the back line is worrying. Maguire and Shaw can't be trusted over a season, RB has been a problem position for years and even Lammens has looked a bit suspect recently - that howler in the WC seems to have eroded some of the calmness he had last year.
"No doubt everyone will turn up on Sunday but there's a wiff of Chelsea at the moment in terms of goals scored v conceded and City (particularly Haaland) aren't messing about at the moment."
Shaw is a strange one. He played all 38 league games last season, started the first three this season but then missed Thursday's Champions League game.
Olid's United on back foot due to late business and unforgiving WSL start
It was tough watching Manchester United's players labour ineffectively against the hungry and aggressive press of London City Lionesses in the Women's Super League's opening match. Simi Awujo's late consolation goal did little to ease the mounting concern for a side that have several teams nipping at their heels.
Don't panic; that has to be United's message. To an extent, it is very early to be writing the team's obituary. The new head coach, Eva Olid, had only three weeks to try to implement her ideas about the way the team should play before that match in Bromley on Friday 4 September. That is not long enough for her to peel away Marc Skinner's imprint on the team.
Read Suzanne Wrack's full piece on United's new era here:
The only game in the Women's Super League today is the 12.45pm (BST) kick-off in Dagenham at the Chigwell Construction Stadium (what a name that is by the way) between West Ham and London City Lionesseses. Star-studded London City lived up to the hype in their opener against Manchester United, whereas West Ham were handily beaten by Tottenham. London City are attempting to upset the applecart in English women's football as they take a well-financed approach to becoming one of the league's leading clubs without being attached to a men's team. After establishing themselves last season, signing more big names really feels like they are trying to go up a level this time around. What do you make of it? Thoughts below the line or via the email link at the top of the page.
Ballon d'Or shortlist shows up Premier League's attacking failings - but tide could be turning
Premier League representation is low when it comes to the 16 attacking players on this year's Ballon d'Or shortlist. Manchester United's Bruno Fernandes and Manchester City's Erling Haaland are there but Cole Palmer, one of the nominees in 2025, is out after an injury-hit year and English football's shift towards physicality and set pieces last season is summed up by none of the forwards from the best team in the country making the cut.
The trio giving Arsenal a presence - Gabriel Maghalhães, Declan Rice and William Saliba - are all defensive minded. Arsenal won the league but their forwards are not regarded as elite. Injuries played a part, denying Martin Ødegaard, Kai Havertz and Bukayo Saka fluency, but Mikel Arteta's side were not loved by neutrals. There was respect rather than admiration for their defensive rigour. There was an argument that a lack of ambition after going 1-0 up stopped Arsenal from beating Paris Saint-Germain in the Champions League final.
It was a close-run thing, but a second consecutive European title for PSG was a victory for attacking football over the Premier League's attrition. Luis Enrique's side keep beating English opponents, and there was a similar vibe at the World Cup. Games flowed more in North America, in part because of officials clamping down on the "meat wall" at set pieces.
Mudryk picks up ankle injury in training to halt comeback with Spurs
Tottenham Hotspur winger Mykhailo Mudryk injured his ankle in training and is expected to be sidelined until after the international break.
The 25-year-old joined Spurs on a season-long loan from rivals Chelsea on transfer deadline day and made his debut off the bench in last weekend's goalless draw at Nottingham Forest.
Mudryk previously played under Spurs manager Roberto De Zerbi on Ukrainian side Shakhtar Donetsk before joining Chelsea in January 2023. He struggled to establish himself at Stamford Bridge, however, and his career was put on hold after an adverse analytical finding for meldonium in an anti-doping test in 2024.
The Football Association handed him a four-year ban, but he appealed to the Court of Arbitration for Sport and his suspension was later reduced following an agreement between the FA and the World Anti-Doping Agency.
"(With) Mudryk, it was a stupid injury and we hope he can come back as soon as possible. For him and for us," De Zerbi told reporters on Friday.
"For him because he suffered too much and for us because we lost an important player.
"He played 15 minutes in Nottingham, he played well, but it's in the normal process when one player doesn't play for a long time."
Email from Joshua Keeling: "I think Hull will finally come unstuck and get a hammering today. They're good in defence, but not good enough to stop Chelsea. And they're not good enough in attack to make it one of those high scoring games Chelsea have been having.
"As for the Manchester derby, I think City will win it, unfortunately.
What do you make of Mainoo? Everytime I watch him I'm amazed that he is not a starter for England. He seems like exactly the kind of midfieder we always decry the lack of, someone to control the tempo and knit things together. Let me know via the email link at the top of the page.
Our chief football correspondent has been writing about how the overlooked England midfielder is key to Manchester United in derby...
Mainoo moves from outsider to main man after summer of hurt
It was a sight the England press pack became increasingly used to seeing after the team's World Cup matches over the summer. Kobbie Mainoo was invariably the first to leave the dressing room, walk through the mixed zone - eyes dead ahead, features impassive - and board the bus.
It was as if he could not get out of the stadiums quick enough and the further England progressed the more pronounced it started to feel. There was a real gap between Mainoo and the next England player to depart the stadium in the knockout rounds. The Manchester United midfielder is inscrutable, even in the heat of battle. It is part of his enviably unflappable temperament. It was no great leap to imagine what lay behind the mask - tremendous frustration as Thomas Tuchel kept on leaving him out.
Mainoo did not play a single minute at the tournament. He was an unused substitute all the way to the semi-final exit against Argentina, and when everyone expected to see him in the third-place playoff against France he did not make the bench. The Football Association said before the game he had picked up an unspecified injury.
For Mainoo it was a lost summer and yet it was physically and mentally draining all the same, what with the training and travel; the demand to stay focused as he waited and waited.
Read David Hytner's latest on the resurgence of Kobbie Mainoo:
With no 12.30pm kick-off in the Premier League, if you want your early Saturday football fix there is plenty of EFL action. West Brom and QPR are among the early form teams in the Championship, the Baggies can go back to the top of the table if they can win this one at home. In one of the early League Two fixtures, Bristol Rovers v Grimsby is another pick for me.
May I recommend you start your Saturday by reading Barney Ronay's latest column on the Premier League's work with the Together in Suicide campaign.
Football lends voice to message worth relaying: men should talk about their pain
If you watched US television adverts during the World Cup for any length of time one thing just kept leaping out. I've mentioned this before here, but it still seems both jarring and significant. Every third or fourth rotation in that endless daytime scroll, in between the Chicken Megadeth Hyper-Box Family Meal Deal, either side of David Beckham expertly consuming a light beer, is an advert for antidepressants.
The format for these is always the same kind of thing: contented, wholesome people throwing frisbees, or strolling through a small-town antiques fair, while a warm, honeyed, reassuring voiceover talks about how horrifying their lives are, with the suggestion that only a lengthy course of Smileothorium can solve this.
In another world there would be a call to study this phenomenon, to consider why a nation of such dazzling abundance and opportunity should also feel glazed, worthless and deprived of hope. But this is not that world. More than 50 million Americans have depression. This is demand and supply in action, a battle for market share in a £6bn industry. The US often worries about itself in its post-industrial age. What are we now? What can we still make? Where is the new frontier? Well, human misery is looking pretty hot right now.
The reason for talking about this here is that English football is doing a good thing this week. Between 4-14 September the Premier League is sponsoring the Together Against Suicide campaign. Harry Kane and Prince William have spoken warmly in support. The league is posting words of solidarity on its X account, which is probably not the best way to cheer yourself up if we're being honest.
Good morning football fans, before we start looking ahead to today, shall we have quick recap of last night's action?
There's not much to recap, to be honest, although West Ham did pump Wrexham 6-0 in east London. Jarrod Bowen got the first just before the half hour as one of six different scorers.
North of the border, Hearts won 3-0 at Stenhousemuir to reach the Scottish League Cup semi-final.
Tom will be here shortly, but just to get you in the mood for today's football action, here are the Premier League games:
Bournemouth v Brentford (3pm, all times BST)
Aston Villa v Nottingham Forest (3pm)
Crystal Palace v Ipswich Town (3pm)
Chelsea v Hull City (3pm)
Liverpool v Fulham (3pm)
Tottenham v Everton (5.30pm)
Sunderland v Arsenal (8pm)