A stodgy final saw silky Spain deservedly beat cynical Argentina. Football wasn't coming home after all as England suffered semi-final heartbreak again, before salvaging some pride to finish third - their best World Cup finish since 1966. The Tartan Army drank America's bars dry as their team went out with a whimper. Cape Verde lasted longer than Germany. It was the end of the road for Ronaldo and Modric, while the phrase "hydration break" entered everyday parlance. But beyond the pitch, it has been an eventful five weeks, too.
Here are 26 viral World Cup moments you might have missed ...
LOLing Stones
Won't somebody consider Tommy T's blood pressure? After England defeated Mexico, defender John Stones suddenly clutched his shoulder in the Azteca Stadium dressing room. Teammate Declan Rice, who was in on the gag, called over manager Thomas Tuchel, whose face fell with worry. At which point, perfectly timed with the music pumping out, Stones broke into an air-punching dance. Tuchel saw the funny side and hugged him. Stones reprised the prank after the Norway victory. You can't kid a kidder.
Is Vicky bovvered, though?
Who says WAGs are all pout and no passion? Victoria Beckham became an instant meme after failing to react to England's equaliser during the tense quarter-final against Norway. When Jude Bellingham scored, her husband, David, and son Romeo leapt to their feet in joy. Playing to type, unsmiling Posh Spice was too busy chatting to her hairdresser Ken Pavés to even notice. "She was celebrating inside, I promise," David said later.
Shaggy cat story
Commentary came over all stream-of-consciousness during Côte d'Ivoire v Norway. When winger Oscar Bobb came on, the BBC's Danny Murphy said wistfully: "I used to have a cat called Bob. He jumped in the back of a Royal Mail van and we lost him. Sad, really." "The game isn't that bad," chuckled Murphy's colleague Steve Bower. When the throwaway remark captured viewers' hearts, Murphy revisited it during Spain v Austria. "Bob didn't actually die. We got him back six or seven weeks later. Unfortunately he'd gone feral and we couldn't reintegrate him into the home. He ended up living with my friend's parents in Preston." A furry-tale for the ages.
Vikings make waves
Norway fans did it in stadiums, on subway escalators and in Times Square. The synchronised "Viking row" celebration soon spread around the globe. Norwegian politicians put their differences aside to do it, with speaker Masud Gharahkhani turning coxswain. Golf fans did it to celebrate a Viktor Hovland birdie on the PGA Tour. Care home residents did it. Fighter pilots did it in their F-35 cockpits. Trust England to poop the party. After the Three Lions knocked Norway out, fans chanted: "There'll be no f*cking rowing in New York."
Rowing refusenik
Not everyone had a liking for Vikings. One Norway supporter ostentatiously refused to join in and went on news programmes worldwide to explain why. "It drives me crazy," said Emil Anners Lappen. "The Vikings did not row across the Atlantic. They sailed. They can win whatever they want. I will not row." All very principled until viewers pointed out that Lappen had a set of oars mounted on the wall behind him.
Belgians troll Trump
It sparked accusations of cheating when President Trump personally lobbied the Fifa boss, Gianni Infantino, to defer the red card ban given to USA striker Folarin Balogun, allowing him to play in the last-16 tie against Belgium. Justice was done when the co-hosts were thrashed 4-1 by a Belgian side fired up by the scandal. "Overturn this!" they shouted, before gleefully mimicking Trump's signature YMCA dad-dance. Bigly gratifying.
Harry the teenager's voice breaks
Someone pass that man a lozenge. Having lost his voice during the celebratory rendition of Wonderwall after the nail-biting win over Mexico, England captain Harry Kane conducted a hilariously croaky on-pitch BBC interview. Oasis frontman Liam Gallagher sympathised, tweeting: "It's hard work that singing, Harry Kane. C'mon England, c'mon Wonderwall."
Jude and Erling's cute bromance
They might have been quarter-final opponents but England's Jude Bellingham and Norway's Erling Haaland have an endearing friendship, dating back to their Borussia Dortmund days. Social media was awash with pics of the pair embracing and Bellingham kissing Haaland on the cheek mid-interview. Some jokingly compared it to gay ice hockey romance Heated Rivalry and wrote erotic fan-fic. Even after defeat, Haaland sportingly insisted: "Bellingham has too many critics ... He's one of the best in the world ... Anybody would want a Jude in their team."
Rooney sticks his oar in
A decade since Gary Lineker was forced to host Match of the Day in his underpants after vowing to do so if Leicester City won the Premier League, BBC pundit Wayne Rooney made his own unwise on-air wager. The former England captain said that if Norway reached the quarter-finals, he would row down the River Mersey. Norwegian striker Erling Haaland duly called out Rooney. Rooney turned out to be a man of his word and duly rowed down the Hudson with colleagues Joe Hart and Micah Richards.
Javier's X-rated heckle
During the Mexico v England epic, cameras captured the home team's coach, Javier Aguirre, calling out to Three Lions winger Anthony Gordon, who was hugging the touchline in front of Aguirre's technical area. Why? Just to tell him: "Hey Gordon, fuck you!" It was merely potty-mouthed banter and both cracked up laughing. Gordon later said being sworn at was "just a bit of fun" and "a compliment".
Haaland hits the catwalk
Russian model Anastasia Kostromitina went viral for being an Erling Haaland lookalike, embracing the resemblance by posting Instagram videos recreating the striker's facial expressions. As she gained modelling offers and millions of followers, the Moscow-based 24-year-old said it was "like a dream".
A different kind of rowing
When cameras caught them squabbling in the stands, one couple sparked speculation worldwide about what they were arguing about. The South Africa supporters initially seemed to be having a good time. The mood turned sour when the male fan checked his mobile and she glanced at the screen. He appeared to say "It's nothing" before swiftly pocketing the phone. She disagreed. He unwisely told her to "calm down". She sat down looking furious while he repeatedly apologised. As social media users urged her to "file for divorce", it was like a footballing Coldplay kiss cam.
Roon or Poch: who wore it best?
USA manager Mauricio Pochettino became an unlikely style icon. Pundit Wayne Rooney liked Poch's touchline look so much, he bought the same outfit and wore it on the BBC coverage. Rooney drew the line at rolling up his sleeves, though. He's not a complete copycat.
Your coach is now departing
England's assistant coach Anthony Barry became a cult hero for his pithily revealing interviews in the tunnel at half-time, offering insights into Tuchel's tactics and the dressing room mood. During the third-place playoff, Barry became tearful talking about his pride in "11 lads with broken hearts". Just as enjoyable was his habit of abruptly exiting at the end of the conversation. Well, he had a dugout to get back to.
Leads united
A dog that had been missing for a month was reunited with her owner after appearing in a viral video of celebrating Mexico fans. Gorda was spotted by her owner's brother in footage from Ciudad Victoria after the co-hosts beat Czechia. "Life is good," posted Ale Garcia after they were reunited. "Mexico won and I found my dog after a loooong time thanks to a livestream lol."
Wonderwallet
Argentina fans took a break from Messi mania and Falklands chants to provide a heartwarming moment. During their victory over Jordan, a fellow fan dropped his wallet. Fans checked the name on the cards inside, then sang it until the owner appeared and was reunited with his lost property.
Gary Lingerer, more like
One gets the distinct impression that Gary Lineker enjoyed making the World Cup uncomfortable for his former BBC bosses. Having criticised his ex-colleagues for broadcasting from "a green box in Salford", grinning Gaz not only made a cameo as an ITV pundit but unexpectedly returned to the BBC by gatecrashing Micah Richards' Match of the Day interview after England beat Norway. "Look who's turned up," said an awkward Richards.
Have you missed me?
Thanks to mobile phones, people are rarely out of contact nowadays. Hence it felt like a throwback when 65-year-old England fan Michael Hewitt went awol for 10 days. En route to Boston to support the Three Lions, "Little Mick" lost his phone and plane tickets, so decided to turn a brief layover in Spain into a longer break. Interpol, Spanish police and the British consulate launched a manhunt. Football fans spread the word online. The appeal appeared on TV bulletins. Hewitt turned out to be happily watching games in the bars of Barcelona, according to his relatives, "blissfully unaware that the world was searching for him".
Get outta my cup!
It wouldn't be a World Cup without *checks notes* Ross Kemp filming himself in front of the TV. The EastEnders hard man and documentary-maker has become a cult hero for posting vein-popping videos. "Come on, England, shut that crowd up! Jude, Jude, Jude! Yes, Harry Kane! That's what I'm talking about!" Bonus points for excessive drooling and having his reading glasses perched atop his head.
No subtitles required
It's the international language of football. Japanese fan Hirochika Nakakuki went viral after a vox pop interview with Fox Sport, when he didn't let the language barrier stand in the way. "Excuse me," he said charmingly. "I cannot speak English but I am EXCITED!"
'Not my finest hour'
Veteran midfielder Jordan Henderson suffered a freak injury while celebrating England's win over Mexico. Having received a yellow card, Hendo climbed over the advertising hoardings at full-time, only to fall badly, break his wrist and get taken to hospital by paramedics. He became the first footballer to be booked and stretchered off without actually playing. "Not my finest hour," he admitted sheepishly.
Danny the champion of the World Cup
BBC commentator Danny Murphy was every England fan when they missed a chance to score against France and he drummed the desk in frustration. "Danny, people can hear you if you bang your microphone on the table," noted colleague Steve Wilson. "Sorry," muttered Murphy. "It was that or shout really loud."
Kenny Dog-leash
It's been a classic World Cup for canines. During Argentina v Cape Verde, cameras cut to a dog wearing ear defenders, casually sitting in the VIP section of Miami Stadium. Brodie the golden doodle has become a crowd favourite, amassing 2.3 million Instagram followers. He was even made an honorary member of the Tartan Army after partying with Scotland fans earlier in the tournament.
Big brother's little brother
Spain's teenage sensation Lamine Yamal might have won the final but his three-year-old brother Keyne enjoyed an equally good World Cup, following his gifted elder sibling around. When the pair spotted each other on the big screen after the win over Belgium, broad grins and toddler face-pulling ensued. Wholesome content.
Tequila shots on us
South Korean fans enjoyed sampling the local culture ahead of their group game against Mexico but were foiled when they tried to take a bottle of tequila into Estadio Guadalajara. Refused entry at the gate, they couldn't let it go to waste, so cracked it open and invited passing home fans to help finish it. Impromptu party! Mexico supporters had already earned credit by dancing to Gangnam Style when South Korea beat Czechia.
Everyone's a critic
The final's Super Bowl-style half-time show kicked off with Madonna arriving in a dune buggy driven by Ronaldo and Ronaldinho. A tag-team production proceeded to take in the Muppets, BTS, Justin Bieber, Shakira, Burna Boy, Coldplay and a children's choir wanging on about love. When BBC presenter Gabby Logan turned to the pundits for their verdict, Wayne Rooney spoke for the nation: "My favourite bit was when it finished. I like a lot of them artists but I thought it was crap."