Guardian writers' predicted position: 12th (NB: this is not necessarily Louise Taylor's prediction but the average of our writers' tips)
Last season's position: 14th
Prospects
Pretty bright. A team's second season in the Premier League after promotion is traditionally regarded as hazardous but all the indications are that Daniel Farke'Leeds will not merely harbour a high degree of immunity to this syndrome, but could debunk it as a lazy cliche. The spine of the side looks robust and has been reinforced by the club record £40m signing of James Trafford from Manchester City and the £34m acquisition of the Bosnia and Herzegovina centre-half Tarik Muharemovic from Sassuolo.
Much hinges on Dominic Calvert-Lewin remaining fit. At times last season, Farke's centre-forward proved unplayable as Leeds finished a respectable 14th. This time round Calvert-Lewin and his fellow forwards should benefit from assists provided by the talented Harry Wilson, a free transfer recruit from Fulham.
Significantly, survival was achieved lafter an unconvincing start to the campaign that, by November, had placed Daniel Farke's job in jeopardy. After a switch to a 3-5-2 formation the team improved, radically. Indeed, were there a separate Premier League table for the second half of the season, Leeds's form from the start of December would have left them seventh. Pre-season results can be notoriously misleading, but it is worth noting Leeds have impressed against some strong opposition. "Pre-season has given us confidence," said Farke.
While the manager aims to take Leeds to "a new level", such ambition is tempered by sensible caution. "Everyone is talking of Europe and trophies, but it's important we stay humble and grounded," he said. "In the last 25 years our highest Premier League finish has been ninth so we need to go step by step. The second year after promotion can be difficult and dangerous, but we are hopeful we can have a good season."
Off-field picture
The dated, if hugely atmospheric, Elland Road is undergoing a wholesale redevelopment in a project instigated by the club's owners, 49ers Enterprises, the investment arm of the NFL's San Francisco 49ers. One of the ideas behind this much-needed modernisation - involving an increase in capacity from 37,792 to 53,000 - is to help increase commercial revenue streams and, in turn, be less restricted by football's spending rules. Another priority is reducing the lengthy season ticket waiting list. Elland Road should remain fully operational on match days as work progresses on a design intended to be the centrepiece of a wider local regeneration. The only frustration is that the West Yorkshire combined authority plans for a new tram network have once again been heavily delayed. With public transport infrastructure poor in a part of Leeds notorious for serious traffic congestion that could prove a big problem on match days at an expanded arena.
Owner-fan relationship
Decent. Leeds have had some unpredictable owners in recent years so the sense of stability, professionalism and vision introduced by 49ers Enterprises has been welcome. With Elland Road now in the process of being redeveloped, Trafford recently becoming the club's record signing and commercial income being boosted appreciably, few doubt the ownership's ambition. A senior executive team comprising chair, Paraag Marathe, managing director, Robbie Evans, and sporting director, Adam Underwood, is generally regarded as efficient, sensible and sufficiently realistic to remain on the right side of spending rules.
The manager
Farke says his personality is "95% coffee and cake on the sofa and 5% fire beast". An economics graduate who originally intended to become a sporting director, the 49-year-old is an interesting, multi-dimensional character with an engaging sense of humour and a love of literary fiction. In steering Leeds to the safety of 14th while also reaching an FA Cup semi-final, Farke lost the "trampoline man" tag that, rather unfairly, had suggested his career largely involved either winning promotion or facing relegation. A coach close to Pep Guardiola, Jürgen Klopp and Thomas Tuchel has described himself as "a football romantic who has learned that romanticism shouldn't blind you to reality". As he explains: "My brand of football normally suits teams who dominate possession, but I'm always switched on to what is necessary."
Stat attack
Leeds scored 16 goals from set pieces and six from the penalty spot. Hitting that mark is not especially rare, it happens roughly twice per Premier League season. What is unusual is doing that while scoring no more than 26 goals in open play, something that had not occurred since 2014-15. Farke may have more in common with Neil Warnock and Sam Allardyce than we first thought.
Star signing
The 23-year-old left-sided central defender Muharemovic has looked outstanding in pre-season. The £34m signing from Serie A has imbued the defence with physicality and controlled aggression as well as assurance on the ball and a refined passing range. The manner in which he bundled Sunderland's centre-forward Brian Brobbey over in pre-season delighted Leeds fans who have already labelled him the Bosnian King. After helping Sassuolo win promotion from Serie B, Muharemovic played a big part in securing a mid-table Serie A finish last season. Comfortable in a back three or four, he appears an inspired reinforcement for a team that, further forward, also seem likely to benefit from Wilson's arrival.
Set for a breakthrough
In recruiting Trafford, Leeds pulled off quite a coup. The 23-year-old England goalkeeper, the understudy to Jordan Pickford, shone at Burnley in the Championship and arguably deserved more than to be No 2 at City last term. Trafford's excellence with his feet can only enhance Leeds and his all-round talent and impressive poise under pressure should guarantee extra points. All the indications are that the son of a Cumbrian farmer who still tries to lend a hand at lambing time is about to show how good he really is.
World Cup impact
Although the versatile forward ended last season in fine form for Leeds, Noah Okafor played just 25 minutes as a substitute - against Algeria - as Switzerland reached the quarter-finals, bowing out to Argentina. Given Okafor's previous rift with Murat Yakin, the's head coach, there was a degree of surprise when he was included in the squad and it appears he had not done quite enough to earn Yakin's full trust. Despite making one appearance for the United States as they reached the last 16 it was still a good summer for Brenden Aaronson. The attacking midfielder briefly left the US pre-tournament training camp in late May and returned a married man after his long-planned wedding to Milana D'Ambra.