Brian McDermott, the England head coach, has justified his surprise decision to omit Jake Connor from England's Rugby League World Cup squad by insisting the players selected are better suited to his plans to defeat the world's best.
For the second consecutive year, Leeds Rhinos half-back Connor is the major talking point in a squad that has no players from the new Super League champions, Wakefield. He was left out by Shaun Wane for last autumn's Ashes despite winning Super League's Man of Steel award. England lost that series 3-0 after a string of limited attacking displays.
Connor has been in impressive form this year for Leeds, but once again he has been overlooked. McDermott has made no secret of his desire to introduce a more off-the-cuff and exciting brand of rugby rather than attempting to go toe-to-toe with Australia and New Zealand, and has selected Hull KR's Mikey Lewis rather than Connor.
He did not shy away from explaining why Connor did not fit his philosophy. "We can't do the usual things," he said. "We've got to play with a point of difference. I've got a squad of players of how I want England to play. Jake Connor missed out on selection by a small margin, it came down to who I think can best stick to the gameplan."
Lewis has been one of Super League's best players in recent seasons, but he had a disappointing year for Hull KR in 2026, punctured by off-colour performances and disciplinary problems. But McDermott appeared to suggest he can get the best out of the half-back.
"Mikey still won a World Club Challenge with Hull KR and guided them to a cup final this year," he said. "I get he wasn't in the best of shape in the back of the year and incurred a couple of bans, but I'll point everyone to the attack plan and the game model I think England needs to have to compete with the bigger nations."
McDermott has been hindered by a number of withdrawals, not least from Wakefield. It is understood they would have had four members of their squad on the plane to Australia this week: winger Tom Johnstone, half-back Jake Trueman and forwards Mike McMeeken and Caleb Hamlin-Uele, but they have opted to undergo post-season surgeries. "I'm really disappointed, it's a real shame the Wakefield boys aren't available," he said.
There are further significant absences across the backline in Rhinos' Ash Handley and Wigan's Jake Wardle. That has led to surprising call-ups for Australian-born players including Brisbane Broncos forward Ben Talty and Sydney Roosters' utility Hugo Savala, who will now probably start at centre against Tonga in England's first game of the tournament in Perth on 17 October.
There is a heavy NRL influence, with 10 players based in Australia selected. That includes the debutant Max King, who was born in Huddersfield but has excelled for Canterbury Bulldogs. Herbie Farnworth, arguably the best centre in the world, is also included and will be critical to England's chances of qualifying from their group.
After facing Tonga, England play France the following week before a showdown with Papua New Guinea in Wollongong that could well decide whether they make the semi-finals or face an early exit.