Discussions are already under way to change the layout of Formula One's newest circuit after driver condemnation of the Madring during its inaugural grand prix. The race in Madrid was won by Mercedes' Kimi Antonelli, but it was notable for being a procession with overtakes failing to reach double digits over 57 laps. Drivers were left frustrated and disappointed at an opportunity that had been lost, resulting in a chorus of criticism.
"I don't know how someone looks at this design and goes 'mint'," said the defending world champion, Lando Norris, who finished third. "There's a lot of opportunity. They can make it into a track that's good for racing and I'm excited to come back here next year if they can make these changes.
"The fact you have to turn and brake basically defeats the whole object of racing. They can do some simple changes. I hope they do it because then it should be more exciting for everyone."
The race was far from thrilling with drivers largely circulating behind one another, albeit at high speed, but unable to find any opportunity to make a move. Audi's Gabriel Bortoleto dismissively categorised it as uninvigorating to drive in as it had been to watch. "I almost fell asleep as well," he said.
The Madring, a hybrid circuit of part public roads and part purpose-built track, has been constructed in north-east Madrid around a conference centre on the way to the airport. Logistically, it has been a success, with transport to and from the track managed well, despite the huge numbers of fans, which F1 puts at 352,000 for the weekend.
The teams enjoyed the facilities and space and it presented a high-speed and spectacular challenge on a narrow, technical circuit many drivers enjoyed over a single lap in qualifying. However, in racing terms, the track, built at a reported cost of approximately £71m, was frustrating.
It was designed by the Italian Jarno Zaffelli who said he hoped "people walk away recognising it's possible to build a street circuit that is not boring". That was a goal left sorely wanting after the race, with people walking away looking bored.
"There are some corners that need to be changed to create more overtaking opportunities because it's nice over one lap, but in the race you're just stuck behind," said Antonelli.
His feelings were echoed by Max Verstappen who finished second. "If you just drive a little bit in the middle, then you can't pass," he said. Verstappen had warned of the poor design from the moment he had first driven the track in a simulator.
The Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, acknowledged there were discussions about changes taking place even before the race. "The tricky bit [is] doing a track that is spectacular for the drivers and then building it in a way that there is lots of overtaking," he said. "I had a discussion [on Saturday] with the CEO of the circuit and they are totally open-minded about next year.
"We've had the discussions with the FIA. What is it we should do? How is it that we should lay the track out when it comes to overtaking? There is a constant discussion and they are on it and understand we can tweak it a little bit."
The Madring has a 10-year contract to host the Spanish Grand Prix and the McLaren team principal, Andrea Stella, was clear he expected there to be considerations of layout changes. "It's a shame it's so difficult. It just requires a large, large lap-time difference to be able to overtake," he said. "What F1, we'd like to review, is there's some modifications required in order to introduce an overtaking possibility.
"At the moment the straight may be long enough, but there's absolutely no way the two cars can enter the corner together. It's basically impossible to attempt overtaking."
Antonelli has a lead of 81 points in the world championship over his teammate George Russell, with nine meetings remaining and the next round at Baku in two weeks.