England beat Pakistan by eight wickets and the series 3-0
24.2 overs: England 130-2 (Cox 59, Root 62) A couple of quick singles does it! Cox hits the winning run, helped by a misfield. Handshakes all round and hugs from Root to Razaullah and his old Yorkshire mucker Shan Masood.
And that's that. A tumultuous Test summer of two resets, the death of Bazball, a nightclub or two, the retirements of Ben Stokes and Kane Williamson, a Test series lost (1-2 to New Zealand) and won (3-0 over Pakistan). Do join us for the white-ball Indian summer, thanks for all your comments. Bye!
And as the red ball summer finishes, the white ball restarts with a T20 on Tuesday against a Sri Lankan team who on Friday were thrashed by the England Lions, who chased down 117 in 7.2 overs
"I think he'll help Joe Root tactically," says Stuart Broad. "To bring a bit of awareness and calm to situations like yesterday. He's not going to come in and make loads of changes everywhere, he'll take his time and make calm, cool selection decisions."
Eoin Morgan "We've learnt our bowlers can bowl in really friendly conditions, the current players are talking about the balls staying harder for longer and with a more prominent seam. I'd like to know how that is regulated by Dukes', how compliance is met and vetted, cos it can dictate how a series goes. Yesterday afternoon we learnt that England need more clarity around the planning and the execution is crucial as they'll come across a lot better batters that Razaullah.
"I really like Dan Lawrence and Jordan Cox and they will definitely be on the plane alongside Emilio Gay."
"I don't think we learnt that much about Ollie Robinson, says Stuart Broad, who basically goes on to intimate that in these conditions a number of county bowlers could have done the same. "I would expect the pitches to be better next summer," he says, " I don't want to see keepers standing up to the stump to 80mph bowlers."
"Batting wise in Test cricket I think we've seen a bit of a shift from our guys, slightly more conservative, slightly more measured, though the volume of hundreds hasn't been there.
"We're delighted right now, we've made a slight shift in the approach to the game, you want to play big series like the Ashes cos you want to be tested. We're moving in the right direction and I hand it over, good luck to them."
Root lifts the trophy, a low-key celebration. He pays tribute to Brendan McCullum and Ben Stokes and says his team is a continuation of that.
Test cricket is not meant to be easy and you're not meant to have it all your own way all the time. The last two days felt like normal Test cricket again. You have to work hard for your wickets. If you get in you should be able to score runs and feel like you can make a valuable contribution and not feel like you're waiting for that good ball all the time. Throughout the series the batters have stood up.
On players not making big hundreds. "That has been across the board all summer. We haven't had the situation or pitches that has been able to happen. The fact that everyone has made a score and contributed shows we have the quality to perform at Test cricket is a good thing too.
"Of course there's things we want to improve on and look at but we've come into this series with a lot of question marks around the team and we've walked away 3-0 quite convincingly, so in that respect I'm happy."
On Jordan Cox's performance: "He showed great maturity and has done throughout the whole series. He had not had much experience batting at number three, and in some of the conditions we found ourselves in as well, the manner he has played has been outstanding. Today he showed great composure, great maturity. At 2-2, the only way back in for them was a start like that and the way we both handled it, he in particular was brilliant."
"Belief was high with two wickets in the first over, but England played very well."
Was he missing a front-line spinner today? "Don't think so, the conditions have been grassy and that's why we played with three fast bowlers.
"We enjoyed Razaullah, everyone did. He's a very good talent and it's good for us. I didn't know too much, to be honest. I learned about his batting, as he came in as an opener [for Peshawar]."
"Coming to England it is difficult for the batters and fast-bowling group. We need to sit down and admit our mistakes, and then work out our best XI."
England's player of the series and Rothesay Test match player of the summer: Ollie Robinson
"It's been very special. It's always nice to cap it off with 3-0 win. It's been well documented that I thought I'd never play for England again. Great to get the opportunity and I've grabbed it with both hands. Hopefully I can keep that going, I've got that inner drive and ambition to push on. The hard work's not done yet, we're just getting started."
Strange that the seamers took the wickets in such a dry summer. "Been a strange one, we expected flatter wickets, but they've nipped a lot with the new balls, the balls are slightly hard and it's done more than previous summers."
"We'll have to adapt again in SA this winter. As a four, it's great to be part of that attack, with three guys that can bowl 90mph. Really special bowling group. Smudge has helped me get a lot of wickets coming up to the stumps, made it look easy. And for Coxy to come in and get five, it shows where the group is at."
Pakistan's chances today? "Anything is possible, my speciality is taking wickets with the new ball. We had a chat, anything is possible and we tried our best but sometimes you are bowling no-balls."
On Razaullah: "I really enjoyed playing against him in first-class cricket, against us he scored some runs. He has a very good future."
His five wickets at Lord's: "It was a special moment for me."
On the chaotic nature of the tour. "Everyone has tried but I think we needed to spend more time in England."
He's 37, how long will he go on? "It depnedsn on my fitness but I'm working hard with my special trainer."
Call me a romantic, but I'd have given it to the young man who played the innings of the summer. Anyway, well played Dan Lawrence for 65, a couple of wickets and a cracking catch.
"Runs are the most pleasing, though I felt I left a few out there. I was happy with the catch and a couple of wickets. I got off to a really nice start that morning but I was frustrated I couldn't get more. I think if I keep playing the way i am I'm sure the three figures will come.
"Contributing in all three games has helped my confidence and fingers crossed I'll keep my place."
As for England, it difficult to gauge against this chaotic Pakistan team but the reboot under Root.2 has been gently impressive (except for when the wheels fell off yesterday. Joe Root finding his batting boots today was a nice coda to the whole thing.
"Bit of chat around Bethell opening but wouldn't Cox be a better option? The right left combination with Duckett could help the latter find his form. It's not been discussed much, but could Duckett's loss of form have anything to do with Crawley's absence?" asks Ollie Benson.
What the Pakistan team need above all is vision, stability and patience at the top to go with the undoubted talent - sums up the Sky view, and the OBO view too.
"The problem is not just here in England," says Urooj Mumtaz, "though the nature of England's wins were massive. Pakistan has made about 11 days of Test cricket out of the 15 and we had one good day. There are ingredients to work with here but it needs a lot of work."
Pakistan will be rueing what have been with that no-ball from Ali that bowled Joe Root. But the scoreline reflects England's complete dominance of a Pakistan team in disarray. What yesterday's wonders from Razaullah did show us though was how much English cricket, or at least English cricket fans, want a strong, vibrant, Pakistan.
England beat Pakistan by eight wickets and the series 3-0
24.2 overs: England 130-2 (Cox 59, Root 62) A couple of quick singles does it! Cox hits the winning run, helped by a misfield. Handshakes all round and hugs from Root to Razaullah and his old Yorkshire mucker Shan Masood.
24th over: England 128-2 (Cox 58, Root 61) A back foot clatter from Cox reduces the target to two.
"England winning 3-0 against Pakistan in this late summer - early autumn test series was expected," writes Farhan. "But this series will be remembered (at least in Pakistan) for the absolutely shambolic behavior by the Pakistan Cricket Board during this tour. It is as if the board had personal vendetta against some their own players and decided to act on it.
"Whatever happens to Pakistan cricket after this series, they will always have Zakaullah's blistering 81 on a sleepy evening in Birmingham."
22nd over: England 121-2 (Cox 53, Root 59) Another fumble on the rope gives Cox his fifty, hauling Saim through midwicket. What a great audition this has been for the multi-dimensional Cox.
21st over: England 114-2 (Cox 46, Root 59) Four singles off Imran and then Razaullah sprints after a Root pull but fluffs the fielding part, and the ball races over the rope. The camera loves him though, and we get his frustration and his charming smile. I don't suppose he will have a need for my new dating service.
20th over: England 106-2 (Cox 44, Root 53) Spin at last. Saim Ayub it is.A neat paddle sweep from Cox races for four.
"Hello (again after quite a while) Tanya, can I show off and tell you I'm tuning in from Salvador, NE Brazil?" You may Cressida Evans. "Hat tip and thanks to Mr Selvey for his amazing service and big love to you and the OBO. Can they finish within the hour? I've got drumming class soon!" All over before lunch.
18th over: England 101-2 (Cox 40, Root 52) Root reaches his 69th Test fifty, running a cut down for four. What will England do when he is no longer available for rescue acts? Just 29 needed now.
Hello Graham Whittington. "Just to say that transfer between Gare de Lyon and Gare du Nord is less stressful if you take RER Line D... which is direct (rather than line B, then line A, which most tourists do). Voilà."
Thank you Graham, have put that in my little black book.
18th over: England 94-2 (Cox 39, Root 46) Razaullah glides in, but the tension the fire, has gone. This and that from Root and Cox then a wristy, authorative, flick for four by Cox.
"Last throw of the dice on the last day of the last Test," writes Peter Metcalfe. "After Yorkshire Air Ambulance saved the life of one of our junior players, I wrote a village cricket memoir as a fundraiser. All my profits to YAA charity. TheBall Hit My bat - Cricket in the Slow Lane is still available for discerning readers. Praised by Mike Brearley and Sir Geoffrey." Good luck to you Peter, and the wonderful YAA.
17th over: England 84-2 (Cox 30, Root 45) Now we see Mohammad Imran. When what Pakistan need is Abdul Qadir. But having said that there's only one run from his over, a no ball, actually make that five from a last-ball overthrow over the keeper's head which gives Root a thousand Test runs at Edgbaston. He's now done that at four different grounds joining Jacques Kallis and someone else who I was too slow to spot.
"Come to think of it, why shouldn't there be a cricket-based dating agency?" asks John Starbuck. "The numbers would be small but the interest intense." This is an excellent idea and I do need another string to my freelance bow..
16th over: England 79-2 (Cox 30, Root 41) One last throw of the dice. Razaullah races in. Cox picks up a couple square, and then a full-throated drive , hold the position, down the ground. Masood throws wildly to a quick single, but England are home and a the ball is well stopped.
"Very envious of the Selvey Grand Tour by rail all the way.," writes Brian Withington.
"On a more modest scale my wife and daughter are just back from a train trip to wonderful Arles and the nearby Camargue. They loved the trains but the transfers between Gares de Nord and Lyon were apparently a tad stressful - try watching Essex bat this last week/season I rejoindered, sympathetically."
Ha! Could be interesting at Chelmsford on Tuesday when Warwickshire come to town.
15th over: England 71-2 (Cox 22, Root 39) Root is unhappy with his helmet, calls for something but the dressing room seem a little bit lost as to what it is. Eventually, someone comes out with a screw. Don't tell me this is a man who can put up shelves as well keep a Test average over fifty. Actually we think it was glue. Perhaps he made those kit aeroplanes as a boy. Anyway, an Ali bouncer flies over Ghori's head for four and England are starting to motor.
"I get what you mean about your homework, but did Lord Selvey ever do an OBO? It would seem like a waste of his particular skills," asks Bob O'Hara. I actually don't know, but I don't think so.
"PS, this was written from Trondheim. Any sense of exoticism is undone by me being in a shopping centre called Circus. Insert your own jokes here."
13th over: England 64-2 (Cox 22, Root 39) Ali for another over, I don't know if Pakistan have decided Razaullah is too expensive, but here Cox cleverly screwdrivers four through midwicket.
Hello David Clark! "We live in Valencia. The esteemed Mr Selvey would be welcome to join us for lunch where I can regale him with my exploits for Wanstead CC in the 1970's. Did he ever play cricket himself?" I'm starting to feel like a dating agency.
13th over: England 58-2 (Cox 17, Root 38) This four-day pitch is made for spin, says Nasser, but Pakistan aren't playing a front-line spinner. So Mohammad Abbas it is, for over number seven. Immaculate, as he was for long summers for Hampshire. Oh my, Root edges, through first and second slip, neither of whom move a whisker. The mild-mannered Abbas is fuming, jabs his arms out and says something along the lines of *%£*!*.
"I'm so glad to see Mike Selvey's name on the OBO," writes Stephen Nichols. "He is a hero of mine, fuelling my love of cricket with his writing for this newspaper for so many years. And I'm pretty sure he spotted Emilio Gay as a future England prospect a few years ago."
12th over: England 51-2 (Cox 16, Root 32) Root steps out his neatly tied Yorkshire boots and drives square, for four, with a commemorative-issue first class stamp. It's another Ali no ball. Cox is frustrated with himself for inside edging onto the pitch, but England are gently steaming now. The players take drinks.
"Sadly will miss Mike ," writes Jim Neale, "as I am going to be in Valencia next Tuesday and would have loved to have bought him a beer (or glass of red wine) as he is at the top of my tree for retired cricketing journalists." He's a good un.
"Just arriving in Florence with clear blue skies." How glorious! Enjoy every second.
11th over: England 44-2 (Cox 15, Root 27) That was Mohammad Ali's 17th no ball of the series, and surely the most costly. Abbas continues. Cox's turn to pick up four with a punchy drive. Pakistan need wickets quickly to stop England running away with this.
Selve is back in touch. "Doing whole trip by train. St Pancras, via Paris to Nimes- Barcelona - Valencia-Seville-Granada- Cordoba- Girona- Paris-London. Few days in each. Fed up with airports a view very much reinforced by the flight cancellations this week." The grand tour! I've been to Barcelona by train, gorgeous trip and very doable.
10th over: England 40-2 (Cox 11, Root 27) Pakistan take a punt on a review for an lbw against Root by Ali. Babar is off the field so Shan Masood is in the box seat It's very not out, drifting high and leg side. Root grins and next ball drives gorgeously, beautifully fielded on the rope by a sliding Masood. Razaullah is back on the field in his lovely Pakistan cable-knit jumper. Root is BOWLED! A drag on! Off stump destroyed. But NO! A no ball. Pakistan are distraught, and next ball Root drives square for four. The balloon burst.
9th over: England 31-2 (Cox 10, Root 20) Abbas maiden perfection.
Razaullah has returned to sit on the sidelines with the reserves. He looks a bit fed up. Someone ruffles his hair. The groundstaff are hovering near the covers.
8th over: England 31-2 (Cox 10, Root 20) There is a bowling change, as Mohammad Ali takes over from Razaullah. He races in, right arm rolling as he does, as if he's gently holding the reins of a horse. England are careful here, trying to take the emotion out of the run chase. Straight bats from Cox and Root.
Jim Neale has a rival: "Travelling on train from Valencia to Seville, 301km/hour at present," writes Mike Selvey, the Guardian's venerable ex-cricket correspondent. "Sadly can't live stream the match but a short day for you."
I now feel a bit like the headteacher is examining my homework.
7th over: England 30-2 (Cox 9, Root 20) Razaullah has raced up to the dressing room, presumably to patch up his finger. Abbas tiptoes in again - ooof Root edges just in front of first slip. Abbas throws up his hands. But the next ball is a lolly legside and Root tinkers him away for a couple. Babar licks his fingers at slip, his Pakistan cap firmly on his head.
6th over: England 25-2 (Cox 9, Root 15) Root clips Razaullah for one. It's quiet at Edgbaston, I'm not sure from here if it is tension or anticipation. I f you're there, do write in and tell me. The Birmingham clouds are gathering. A delay as Razaullah gets his finger patched up, with magic spray and possibly a plaster after falling over in his follow through. Three singles from the over, Root looks in quiet control.
5th over: England 23-2 (Cox 8, Root 14) Abbas continues his testing turn. After four dots, Root escapes the examination with a single from the fifth ball. WIll Babar plump for another over for Razaullah?
Good morning Brian Withington!
"For a dead Test match against disintegrated opposition who don't deserve a three test series, this game has been mildly entertaining. It will also be interesting to see whether and how England's flawed no 4 resurrects his flailing career.?"
4th over: England 22-2 (Cox 8, Root 13) Razaullah's first ball is sprayed leg side. He walks back, looking at the grass, chewing on some gum, runs in, low arm, head down like Anderson. His third ball is wide on the off stump and Root bends his knees and wristily cuts for four over gully. Another wider ball, Cox this time takes four. Maybe Abbas will have to be Pakistan's hero, if this is to have a happy ending for them.
3rd over: England 13-2 (Cox 4, Root 8) The groundsman is called onto the pitch to patch up the bowling crease. Repairs done, Abbas continues, less dramatically this time, but testingly on point. "Only rain can save England" reads a placard in the crowd.
That was, says Andy Zaltzman, the first time an England opener has been out first ball since Rory Burns was sent on his way by Mitchell Starc in the Ashes 2021-22.
2nd over: England 11-2 (Cox 2, Root 8) Razaullah rolls his shoulders, once, twice, three times. The first ball is on the money, Root edges the second, an outswinger, awkwardly through the cordon for four. He hits Root high on the pad, Razaullah fancies it and for a second Babar considers it. The last ball is cut over slip for four.
"Oh god," writes Harry Lang, "what fresh hell is this?"
1st over: England 2-2 (Cox 1) Mohammad Abbas carefully choses his ball out of the umpire's magic box and choses right. The first ball does just enough to keep the dream alive. Ooof, Cox is off the mark with a risky single to cover point. Another beauty beats Gay outside the off stump. The pencil slight figure of Abbas slides in again and Gay is rapped on the middle of his front pad as if X marked the spot. England in disarray.
He's only gone and done it! Duckett pushes at the first ball, which straightens up, he nibbles and the keeper collects by his ankle socks. Abbas zooms an aeroplane celebration.
Nasser has a chat with Jordan Cox, who did so well with the gloves yesterday.
"I enjoy keeping, it is great fun, there are not many left handers in the county game so standing up to them was a bit different. You really have to concentrate standing up, the bowlers get so much nip, it's all about holding your shape.
"I should do more keeping. When you're told you're coming into the side and batting three all you want to do is hit balls, but I really enjoy it and luckily I've got good hands."
Would he rather play as a specialist batter or a keeper? "Either," he plays straight down the line.
Razaullah's agent is giving it some welly on X - apparently his phone is ringing red. Razaullah was due to play for Cleethorpes in the Yorkshire Southern Premier League before:
"@TheRealPCBMedia come calling - sort his Passport out, and wing him over for @Edgbaston. He's now made his mark. Franchises already showing interest. Our phones have blown up. Watch this space!"
"It was the first time anyone has put a smile on the face of this Pakistan team," says Urooj Mumtaz. "Such bravado, a strong man, well built and he didn't shy away from it, thrilling to watch, absolute box office."
"It is such a great story," say Athers. "Ten days ago he didn't have a passport, his phone was off when the selectors rang him, they had to send someone to find him , he rocks up, bowls upwards of 89-90 miles an hour when we've been watching Pakistan trundle in at 80mph and his performance last night was fantastic. He took England to the cleaners and the crowd were roaring him on. This kid transformed the mood of the team and the mood around the game."
"I can't think of anyone who has struck the ball harder, except Shahid Afridi." says Ian Ward.
"You can get done by the tail - it's very hard when people have the
license and ability to hit sixes," Alastair Cook told TMS. "What I saw was no plan, it got out of control."
"That's when you need the backroom staff and coaches to step up. I
would loved to have seen a message and some real leadership from the
coaches."
Good morning and welcome to the day you didn't expect. An evening of glorious chaos at Edgbaston brought us, from nowhere, a match, and a born-for-this-moment star - Razaullah, the floor is yours.
Those nine sixes, played with roaring panache, have been matched only by Ben Stokes in a Test innings in England. And now he gets to bowl, blood roaring through those handsome veins. Probably England will cruise to 130. But maybe just maybe, Pakistan can find the old magic. Join us for what this time really is the Test summer's last hurrah.