The Odyssey is the hottest release this summer and you have been looking forward to seeing the much-acclaimed adaptation of Homer's epic ancient Greek poem. But you have been unable to go to the cinema, so when you spot an ad to watch online, you jump at the chance.
There are positive reviews posted on the site so you decide to sign up. Although it asks for your bank details - which is unusual for a "free" trial - you are so eager to watch the blockbuster you input your details.
The site is a fraud, however, and there is no version of the film to watch. Reviews are fake and your bank details are in the hands of criminals.
You have fallen for a common type of scam that piggybacks on the release of a popular new film, TV show, or even a video game. By offering early, or easy access, fraudsters hope that victims will input their financial details.
However, anyone who is tempted has been warned they run the risk of having their computer infected with malware and becoming the target of future phishing scams.
BeStreamWise, a UK campaign body set up to alert the public to the dangers of illegal streaming, says people who submit their personal details are at risk of being targeted by fraudsters again, as well as having money taken from their accounts.
"Criminals are quick to exploit excitement around major releases, such as The Odyssey, using fake streaming links and websites to trick people into handing over personal information and exposing themselves to fraud," it says.
What it looks like
A number of websites have been set up in different languages in an attempt to make the scam appear more convincing.
In some cases consumers are targeted via pop-up adverts; in others, the sites appear in search results, or are accessed via other websites. Reviews and ratings - all fake - are left by "users" who have supposedly watched the film on the site.
The cybersecurity company Kaspersky says some of the fake sites claim to offer dubbed versions of the film in the victim's native language. The language is selected depending on the geolocation of the victim.
Typically, when the victim tries to play the film, they are asked to register to unlock the content, which they are told is free.
They are asked to submit their email address and full name. Later, they are asked to input their bank details, which the site claims are needed in order to activate the trial. The sites typically claim that those who sign up will be offered unlimited access to content over multiple devices.
What to do
Olga Altukhova, an analyst at Kaspersky, says consumers should be particularly wary if a film that has only just been released, and is still showing in cinemas, pops up on an unfamiliar platform.
"We strongly encourage people to access content only through official services to protect their personal data and avoid potential financial losses," she says.
Among the risks from illegal streaming is the potential for malware to be downloaded on to a computer. This could result in a hacker gaining control of the device and accessing information remotely.
Kaspersky also advises that people closely check the URL to ensure it is a legitimate page.
If someone discovers that they have been defrauded, they are advised to immediately inform their bank and then change passwords on sites, and apps, such as their bank, investment and pension providers. Then turn on multi-factor authentication to bolster security.
In the UK, you should contact Action Fraud, the national fraud reporting centre.