Caf to reconsider decision to hold Afcon every four years
This story comes from Ed Aarons and Romain Molina.
The Confederation of African Football (Caf) is preparing to reconsider its decision to hold the Africa Cup of Nations (Afcon) every four years, with the 54 member federations expected to discuss a return to the tournament's traditional two-year cycle at a strategic conference in Cape Verde.
The issue is expected to be put to a vote at Caf's executive committee meeting on Friday afternoon. Caf has been approached for comment.
The potential reversal comes 10 months after Caf moved the competition to a four-year schedule, a decision the Guardian reported was taken without consulting its 54 member associations and sparked considerable controversy.
According to a member of Caf's executive committee, the changing relationship between Fifa and Uefa has played a significant role in the renewed debate.
"Given that there is currently a war between the two organisations, it has been made clear to us that there is no longer any need to hold the Africa Cup of Nations every four years," the official said.
The committee member added: "The switch to a four-year cycle for the Africa Cup of Nations was made in the interests of Europe. Now, Fifa is at odds with Uefa, so everything has changed."
The proposed return to a two-year cycle carries political implications for Fifa's president, Gianni Infantino, who is in Cape Verde as he attempts to win over African voters before the 2027 FIFA presidential election. The Caf president, Patrice Motsepe, said on Thursday there was "unanimous support" for Infantino in Africa.
Hello everyone! If you haven't read this Sid Lowe interview with Rayo Vallecano's Sergio Camello, then do. It's proper.
The piece also includes this graphic about the current top scorers in La Liga, just look how far Raphinha is. Twelve goals in seven league matches ... woof.
I'm surprised that he has barely been mentioned in the Ballon d'Or conversation, although I agree that I'm not sure his year eclipses Lamine Yamal.
Anyway, some Raphinha news has just broken! The Brazilian, Barça's captain, will miss the club's next two matches after picking up a hamstring issue while playing for Brazil. These quotes, from Barcelona head coach Hansi Flick, come courtesy of AFP.
The picture shows something and it's not a big injury," said Flick. "We have to take care about this because he has last season a lot of injuries about this. I think three injuries. And we take care. So, he's not available tomorrow [Saturday against Getafe in La Liga] and also not available in Istanbul against Galatasaray [on Tuesday in the Champions League].
On this day in 1996... England come from behind to win a World Cup qualifier against Poland. And, in the words of Alex Ferguson, Alan Shearer hits it as if he means to kill it.
English football has been one big schadenfreude buffet since Manchester City were found guilty of breaching Premier League financial rules. It's no surprise that Manchester United fans are at the front of the queue for banter-based snacks.
The Red Army group has dusted off the old banner mocking City's trophy drought, which peaked at 35 years before they won the FA Cup in 2011. If you are among those who regard any modern success as invalid - and we should stress the Friday football blog is entirely, painfully neutral - the drought now stands at 50 years.
"Oh, is there a game on Sunday?" hoots Matt Dony. "Maybe I'll amble to the pub and watch it over a half of shandy. I joke, of course. This is one of those times when Big Football's scriptwriters have hit the jackpot.
"A couple of weeks of anticipation, and then a match at the home of the team who arguably suffered the most, with a fanbase who are famously (depending on your allegiance) witty and loud, or entitled and sanctimonious.
"Either way, should be a treat. Right up until the almost-inevitable Erling Haaland first-half hat trick. Ah well."
Given how febrile it's going to be, I pity the fool who's doing our liveblog of the match. Oh.
Enzo Maresca refused to confirm he will remain as Manchester City manager should the club lose their appeal against being found guilty of the vast majority of more than a hundred charges related to breaches of the Premier League's financial rules.
Maresca was speaking publicly for the first time since a verdict that has thrown English football into turmoil was published. City continue to strenuously deny any wrongdoing and their appeal is expected to be heard before Christmas, with a verdict due in the new year.
In May 2022, Pep Guardiola said he would leave the club if he discovered the executive had not told him the truth about their financial dealings. "I said to them: 'If you lie to me, the day after I am not here. I will be out and I will not be your friend any more."
Maresca was asked if he shared the same position as his predecessor. "I would like to speak about this situation when we're going to win the appeal," the 46-year-old said. "It's no sense to speak about anything because I don't have many pieces of information. I trust the club because I trust the people and this is also the reason why I joined the club. There is not another club in the world where I would like to be. I'm very happy to be [here] I'm very proud."
Women's World Cup playoff The Republic of Ireland are now 5-0 up away to Kazakhstan, who are down to 10 players after their captain Yulia Myasnikova was sent off. It's not even half-time.
NBA champion Shai Gilgeous-Alexander has joined the ownership group at Atletico Madrid.
The Oklahoma City Thunder guard has become the latest North American sports star to take an interest in football, following the likes of LeBron James and Tom Brady .
"This is a club with a long-standing presence at the top of European football, and I'm grateful for the opportunity to be part of its future," Gilgeous-Alexander said.
Atletico said the partnership was "grounded in shared values: ambition, excellence and the belief that every result must be earned".
Atletico did not reveal how big a stake 2025 NBA champion and back-to-back NBA MVP Gilgeous-Alexander had taken. "His investment reflects an interest in the club's long-term vision and international growth," it said.
With only 30 minutes played, the Republic of Ireland are 3-0 up away to Kazakhstan in the first leg of their World Cup playoff. Kyra Carusa scored twice, with Chloe Mustaki getting the other goal. The winners of this two-legged tie will face either Belgium or Poland for a place in Brazil next summer.
"Is there any truth to the rumour," begins Krishnamoorthy V, "that Liverpool have printed a pennant with the slogan You Will Walk Alone for Sunday's game?"
World Cup qualifier: Greece v England (5.30pm) The Lionesses are in Crete for the first leg of their World Cup qualification playoff against Greece. This is what you get when you mess with us you're drawn in the same qualification as Spain.
This clown will be on liveblog duty for the game. For now, here's Tom Garry's preview.
Rob Smyth is here to guide you the next little while, with the likes of Andoni Iraola, Mikel Arteta, Michael Carrick, Xabi Alonso and Roberto De Zerbi all due to speak soon.
Brighton's opponents Sunderland will be without striker Brian Brobbey tomorrow after he was one of several Premier League players to pick up injuries during the international break.
John Brewin looks at the situation and Nick Ames the growing discontent from clubs about the extended break.
Brobbey's injury means Sunderland fans might see more of 18-year-old striker Juan Angulo, who scored his first goal for Ecuador in a friendly against Panama on Monday ... in Tokyo.
"The third striker is always a bit different because if you don't have game time it's hard to keep them involved," said Regis Le Bris yesterday.
"It's always interesting to have a young player, an underdog spirit and I think Juan is exactly that profile. We are in our setup and happy with it."
All the Premier League managers are being asked about Manchester City, including Brighton's Fabian Hürzeler who said "hopefully it will be dealt with".
Brighton go to Sunderland tomorrow looking to pick up where they left off in the Premier League, with that 3-0 win over Arsenal. They are third in the league going into the weekend - Harry Paterson assesses how high they can finish this season ...
Staying in Spain, Sid Lowe has been speaking to Rayo Vallecano striker Sergio Camello, who has scored seven goals in seven games in La Liga this season.
The interview is accompanied by some wonderful pictures of Camello in Vallecas, the working-class Madrid neighbourhood that is home to Rayo and its wonderfully old-fashioned ground.
Rayo is the last team standing from football from another time, that's what I like. Even just parking here on the street right in front changes things. The same faces, every time. The least important thing about the football here is the football; it's what they stand for every weekend, what they believe in, the connection.
Mourinho hits out at 'ridiculous' Mbappé criticism
José Mourinho joked this week that he'll be "lucky to still be around" when the Manchester City case is put to bed.
"I think we will eventually get an ending, but we [Mourinho and the journalist] are both in our 60s and we'll need to be lucky enough to still be around when the final verdict arrives," Mourinho told the Italian newspaper Corriere dello Sport.
During his press conference in Spain today, Mourinho has defended Real Madrid's Kylian Mbappé after the striker was pictured at a nightclub in Paris and riding a bike in Switzerland while he recovers from a knee injury.
"Are these criticisms over the top? They are ridiculous," Mourinho said today. "All the players who were obliged to be present every day for their recovery were here.
"Mbappé came, like the others, to undergo scans in order to be diagnosed. He then went to see a specialist in France, because he has history with his knee which we cannot ignore.
"Problems involving football are not sufficient for you [the media].
"Therefore you have raised the issue of the nightclub, which in fact was not one, because it was used for a private event for Fashion Week.
"As for the bicycle in Switzerland. It was in a hotel, made up of small houses, which makes them available so guests can ride to the communal areas, and you would have us believe he was competing in the Tour of Switzerland."
Real Madrid host Villarreal at the Bernabéu tomorrow night and are six points off the leaders Barcelona in La Liga.
As a Liverpool fan, I don't think the Man City players cheated or weren't a great team. But the point is that they cheated to have such a great team. There were times during our title battles where we had a better team (just) but their squad was ridiculous. Regarding injuries, tiredness, fatigue etc they had a huge - unfair - advantage.
And on this idea of a Premier League glass ceiling that they so nobly broke, Liverpool went nearly 25 years without winning it, often finishing mid table. See also Arsenal and Man Utd. Being a big club with lots of fans is obviously an advantage, but one built over the course of a century, rather than being bestowed on the whims of a foreign state.
Anyway, whatever their punishment, City fans will think it's too harsh and everyone else too lenient. May as well just get it all over and done with.
Another little tidbit from Maresca was his quip about possibly having to coach City in lower leagues. Guardiola had previously said (joked?) he would stay with City if they were relegated to League One.
"I won the Championship with Leicester, so in case we're in League One, we'll see," Maresca said with a smile. "But we are thinking about something we don't know."
One of the more interesting things Maresca admitted was that the topic of City's 115 charges (114 of which they are now guilty of) did not come up in conversation during his talks about succeeding Guardiola in the summer.
Well, that was a grilling. Maresca fielded questions for about 20 minutes from some of the British sports media's top journalists. He acknowledged that perhaps he was not giving the answers they were hoping for as he repeated the club's official lines on sticking together and the confidence they will win an appeal. I think City will be relatively pleased with his performance.
"I trust the club because I trust the people and this is also the reason why I joined the club," said the Italian. "There is not another club in the world where I would like to be. I'm very happy to be [here] I'm very proud."
Maresca was also asked if City's honours won since the Abu Dhabi takeover in 2008 have been tainted. "Absolutely not," he insisted. "The last time I was here was in the treble season [2022-23, as assistant manager] and I know the effort from the players, the club, the manager. I know the effort that the club put to achieve that kind of target so I don't have any doubt about that."
City strenuously deny any wrongdoing and have lodged an appeal against the verdict of an independent commission. One sanction the club could face should thee appeal fail is expulsion from the Premier League.
City travel to Anfield on Sunday to face Liverpool.
And with that, Maresca takes his leave. Just the one slip-up against a barrage of probing questions from the media - saying he trusts the club "at the moment", which he later clarified to say he trusts them "always".
Another thing to note: Maresca said he spoke to Pep Guardiola after the derby win over Manchester United last month but seemingly not since the guilty verdict.
Maresca is asked whether he would have accepted the City job had he known about the charges.
"100%," he replies. "I know the organisation from years ago. I know how serious they are. They do the right things. I would like to speak about this when we win the appeal.
"To be honest. We didn't speak about that," he says of whether he spoke to City about the charges before taking the job. "That wasn't a problem for the club at the time because they are speaking in an honest way. They are convinced in the end that they are going to win the appeal."
"I understand that probably you want to hear different words from me," Maresca admits. "But the real words is that, the players ... yes, the noise is there ... they are 20-25 years old. They come, they enjoy their training sessions. They go home happy. They are top of the league.
"So the players are relaxed. They are just thinking of how we can beat Liverpool."
"They can face the pressure, absolutely," Maresca says of the test facing his players at Anfield on Sunday. "They already experience a similar a situation. I don't know ... Enzo Fernandez is playing in Argentina. In Argentina, it's almost every game to go to Anfield."
Maresca says City achievements 'absolutely not' tainted
Maresca is asked whether his achievements as Pep Guardiola's assistant feel tainted by the guilty verdict. His response? "Absolutely not."
He slightly dodges a question about whether, as Guardiola had said previously, he would stay on as head coach if City are relegated. "There is not another club in the world where I want to be," Maresca says.
Maresca bats away the first question from the BBC about the guilty verdict.
"I understand the reason why most of you are here," he says to the journalists present, "but the only thing I can say is that something I already said: there is a process ongoing and in this moment I completely trust the club. This is what I can say about that."
The seats are filling up in the media theatre at Manchester City's training ground. We shall see how much Enzo Maresca is willing or able to talk about the club's guilty verdict. As usual, it is the head coach who must front up to the press about club issues instead of those higher up.
European FAs pushing for three-week international break to be abandoned
Nick Ames
Europe's football associations have raised serious concerns about the impact of the extended international break and will ask Uefa to push for a reversion to the previous scheduling.
The new three-week break left European countries tasked with four Nations League games, which typically took place within 11 days. It has brought deep misgivings about player workload, injuries and financial viability, with one FA president telling the Guardian it was "a disaster" and numerous others saying the schedule is unworkable.
Football Weekly: You can watch/listen to the pod squad discuss Sunday's clash between Liverpool and Manchester City, plus much more, in the latest episode.
A reminder that Enzo Maresca will face the media in 20 minutes' time at the Etihad Campus in Manchester. You can follow the press conference live here.
Big interview: Oliver Glasner has told Ben Fisher he has "two hearts" beating inside his chest as he prepares to take his Nottingham Forest team to face former club Crystal Palace on Sunday.
When Glasner left Palace at the end of last season, he raised a few eyebrows by turning up at Forest. Relations between the two clubs have been tense since Forest took Palace's place in the Europa League last season after they complained to Uefa about a breach of its multi-ownership rules.
It was not a decision against Crystal Palace, because I decided last October, one year ago, not to sign a new contract. It was then, in the summer, a decision for Nottingham Forest, due to different reasons. Sometimes unexpected things happen in life ... there was no plan for me to be Forest manager.
What do Man City fans actually think? The Guardian has spoken to a handful on either side of the Atlantic.
Whatever happens, nobody can take the last 15 years away from us. We lived every moment: Agüero in 2012, the centurions, the treble, Istanbul. Those memories are ours and no verdict changes that. Right now I just feel confused - Ben, season ticket holder
I can't give those memories back. But I do know that the richest people in the world thinking that the rules don't apply to them, that they can cheat and then arrogantly chuck endless money at the situation, has nothing to do with what I love about football, nothing to do with what I love about Manchester, nothing to do with what I love about my club ... I'm really sad - James, fan for more than 40 years
The severity and duration of City's offences warrant significant punishment, but the verdict that it took this much sustained rule-breaking and money to prevent United, Arsenal and Liverpool adding to their own trophy cabinets is an indictment on the Premier League - Jon, fan in Washington DC
"I have titles but I don't have them hanging on my wall. I have them in my head," said Coventry manager Frank Lampard, who spent one season at Manchester City in 2014-15, during his press conference yesterday.
"Most players that have played and competed against the best players have worked very hard to win. I think it would be very hard to take someone's title away as a player individually as I think they should be in your head as opposed to in this beautiful glass cabinet or whatever.
"I'm not inside the story, I'm outside it completely - I played for Man City a long time ago, for one year - so we'll wait and see what the result of the appeal is."
Lampard's Coventry, who picked up their first win of the season against Nottingham Forest three weeks ago, host Newcastle on Monday night.
Kompany 'proud of everything we achieved on pitch' at City
Former Manchester City captain and now Bayern Munich manager Vincent Kompany has been speaking to the media in Germany this morning.
I played 11 years for the club, I loved all the years I played for the club and all we achieved and did on the pitch, that is something I am really proud of.
Everything else, as a player, you are not a part of that. As a coach of Bayern Munich, I am not actually too much occupied with that topic as much as preparing for the game we have to win tomorrow.
"Khaldoon says he would rather spend £30m on the 50 best lawyers in the world and sue Uefa for the next ten years than agree a financial penalty."
Rob Draper looks at the words of Manchester City's lawyer Simon Cliff as he profiles the club's chair, Khaldoon al-Mubarak - the man who has dictated the aggressive, confrontational stance City have taken with football authorities.
Before facing the national media for the first timesince Manchester City's guilty verdict this morning, Enzo Maresca has given an in-house interview with the club's media. There are plenty of references to "the noise" following City at the moment but Maresca was keen to insist his players will not be distracted by it.
"The feeling is fantastic, to be honest," said Maresca. "The players are excited for the next two games. But especially they are excited because in this moment we are top of the league. The players are just focused on that. They know what we can control is the football side - they are not worried at all about different things.
"They know their profession and they know that the noise is there but they don't care too much about the noise. They are just focused in this moment on how we can beat Liverpool and how, together with the fans, we can try to win in Anfield."
Everton owner exploring sale of club after two years
First, the breaking news coming out of Merseyside this morning is that The Friedkin Group are exploring the sale of their controlling interest in Everton. The group completed its takeover from Farhad Moshiri in December 2024 and have overseen the men's team's move from Goodison Park to Hill Dickinson Stadium.
"The time is right to consider the next chapter for Everton," said a club statement. "We will only entertain interest from parties who we strongly believe will be the right stewards to take the club forward and build on the momentum that has been established."
Hello and welcome to the weekend football countdown as the Premier League returns after an international break overshadowed by the guilty verdict handed to Manchester City on over 100 financial rules breaches. City, who are appealing the verdict, have sought to put on a united front, with Erling Haaland saying yesterday that the club "have to stick together" as they return to action on Sunday at Anfield. All eyes will be on Enzo Maresca at 10.30am (BST) as he faces the media for the first time since news of the verdict.
Other press conferences to look out for today are Andoni Iraola, whose Liverpool side host City this weekend, and Mikel Arteta, the former City assistant coach who has signed a new contract as manager of champions Arsenal this week. We'll also build up to the weekend's other Premier League games, including Manchester United's clash with winless Tottenham at Old Trafford, and an EFL fixture list that includes Sunday's south-coast derby between Southampton and Portsmouth. Tonda Eckert has this week been handed a six-week suspended ban for his part in the Spygate scandal.
England Women are in action at 5.30pm today as the European playoffs for next summer's World Cup get under way. The Lionesses must progress past Greece and Slovakia/Ukraine to secure their place at the finals in Brazil. Ella Toone has returned to the squad as a late call-up for today's first leg in Greece. Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland are also in the hunt.
Don't forget you can get in touch throughout the day with your thoughts via email.