After 241 days in orbit this NASA astronaut is finally home
- Date:
- July 27, 2026
- Source:
- NASA
- Summary:
- NASA astronaut Chris Williams and two Roscosmos cosmonauts are back on Earth after spending 241 days aboard the International Space Station. Their journey covered more than 102 million miles and included 3,856 trips around the planet.
- Share:
NASA astronaut Chris Williams returned to Earth on Sunday after completing an eight month science mission aboard the International Space Station. He traveled home with Roscosmos cosmonauts Sergey Kud-Sverchkov and Sergei Mikaev.
The Soyuz MS-28 spacecraft touched down safely by parachute on July 26 at 5:27 a.m. CDT (3:27 p.m., Kazakhstan time) southeast of Dzhezkazgan. The crew had departed the space station at 2:03 a.m.
Williams and his crewmates spent 241 days in space after launching to the International Space Station on Nov. 27, 2025. During the mission, they completed 3,856 orbits of Earth and traveled more than 102 million miles.
The flight marked the first space mission for Williams and Mikaev. It was Kud-Sverchkov's second journey into space.
Cancer Research and Advanced Manufacturing
While living aboard the orbiting laboratory, Williams contributed to numerous scientific studies and technology demonstrations. His work included research that could support the development of new cancer treatments.
He also helped investigate ways to improve the production of materials in space for use in high performance computers and electronics.
Williams conducted two spacewalks during the mission. One prepared the station for upgrades to its electrical power system, while the other involved replacing a faulty joint on the Canadarm2 robotic arm.
The crew's research and maintenance work may benefit people on Earth while also helping NASA prepare for future human exploration of the Moon and Mars.
Recovery and Return to Houston
After completing medical evaluations at the landing site, the crew members will travel by helicopter to Karaganda, Kazakhstan, where recovery teams are stationed.
Williams will then fly aboard a NASA aircraft to the agency's Johnson Space Center in Houston.
More Than 25 Years of Continuous Human Presence
Astronauts and cosmonauts have continuously lived and worked aboard the International Space Station for more than 25 years. The laboratory allows researchers to conduct experiments and achieve scientific breakthroughs that would not be possible under conditions on Earth.
Research aboard the station helps NASA better understand the demands of human spaceflight, develop solutions for extended missions, and create new commercial opportunities in low Earth orbit.
The station also provides an important foundation for future journeys to the Moon through the Artemis program and, eventually, human missions to Mars.
Cite This Page: