Wasps are disappearing this summer, and scientists are worried
Britainâs wasps are mysteriously disappearing, and this summerâs extreme heat may be a major reason why.
- Date:
- September 11, 2026
- Source:
- The Conversation
- Summary:
- Britainâs wasps have become mysteriously scarce this summer, and scientists suspect an unusual combination of temperature swings, heatwaves, and food shortages may be responsible. Even the wasps that remain appear unusually small, potentially offering a glimpse of how extreme heat could reshape insect populations.
- Share:
Summer can be lovely - until a wasp turns up. Whether they present as an irritating picnic visitor or an uninvited loft guest, common social wasps are as much a part of our summer as festivals, sun cream and the growing despair of how to entertain children who've forgotten how to be bored.
But summer 2026 is breaking the norm, and there don't seem to be many wasps about. As a wasp biologist, I've noticed it acutely, because my students need wasps for their experiments, and we simply can't find them.
A second sign that something is wrong is the absence of wasp stories in the media. Wasps tend to be more active in warmer weather. Their colonies grow faster and bigger, and they end up making news headlines by bothering humans. This time last year - also a warm spring and hot summer - the media airwaves were filled with "plagues of wasps" stories. Now, even professional pest-controllers tell me it's a quiet year with very few requests to remove wasp nests.
Admittedly, these are anecdotes not data: the Big Wasp Survey - the only national wasp monitoring survey - is yet to start sampling this summer. But the signs are not good.
If data back this up, their absence worries me greatly because - love them or hate them - wasps are important in ecosystems as pest-controllers, pollinators and decomposers.
So what's happening?
Spring started well for wasps. In the warm, dry spring a glut of glorious foundresses - new queens - emerged from hibernation to start their nests alone, carrying out all the nest building, egg laying, foraging and brood rearing. This nest-founding period is a risky time. If a new queen survives until her first brood emerges as adult workers, though, then the odds are in her favour as she no longer needs to undertake risky foraging.
But spring 2026 was strange: the warm, dry start should have been good. Warm, dry spring weather improves a nest's chance of survival as it ensures a good nectar supply for the queen to develop her ovaries and good prey populations for her to feed the brood. But we experienced unprecedented heat for the time of year, punctuated by cold, damp days and followed by unexpectedly chilly nights.
Such weather extremes may have caused queens to abandon their nests or die, reducing the initial spring queen bounty to a more modest population.
Temperature tolerance
And then came the heatwave. And another. And another. Some insects may benefit from this. Wildlife charity Butterfly Conservation is hoping 2026 could be a "bumper summer of butterflies" because warm, dry days mean uninterrupted foraging, mating and egg-laying.
But all insects have a thermal tolerance called critical thermal maximum (CTmax). If their CTmax is exceeded, insects succumb to desiccation, muscle spasms and eventual stupor.
For honeybees, this is around 49°C - which might sound high, yet ground surfaces exceeded 50°C in the UK heatwaves this summer. But the temperature doesn't need to reach an animal's CTmax to affect their productivity and behaviour. For example, bumblebee cognition and foraging efficiency are impaired by heatwaves of 32°C.
Bumblebee Conservation Trust raised concerns that 2026 may exacerbate a declining trend in bumblebee populations as flowers wither and bees fail to forage effectively.
Wasps are thought to be quite resilient to extreme weather. They are one of the most successful invasive species around the globe. And as a social insect, their thermoregulation behavior (such as wing fanning to cool the larvae) and nest architecture (which has insulating envelopes surrounding the brood combs) may help buffer any environmental perturbations.
Insects also have waxy molecules called cuticular hydrocarbons that coat their exoskeletons protecting them from desiccation. Social wasp cuticular hydrocarbons change structure in response to heat, better protecting them from desiccation in excessive heat.
Their varied diets should also buffer them from imbalances in prey populations. However, their CTmax may be lower than other social insects - at around 45°C (113°F) - which may have made them especially vulnerable to the high ground temperatures of the 2026 heatwaves.
Why are the wasps so small?
There's something else that I've noticed: the few wasps I've seen are rather small. The adult size of many insects is fixed during their development, depending on the quality and quantity of food they receive as larvae. Wasps don't get bigger once they've pupated.
The first workers to emerge in spring are usually small because the queen is limited in how much food she can provide for them alone. But by early August, the foraging capacity of the colony has increased exponentially, brood are better fed and the emerging workers are substantially larger.
So why are we still seeing "spring-sized" wasps? It's possible that limited diversity and abundance of prey may mean their nutrition is restricted. The problem may also be more directly linked to heat. Insect larvae reared at higher temperatures will develop faster and reach pupation at a smaller size.
Global warming is thought to explain the trend in social wasps shrinking in size over the last 100 years. We could be seeing this in real-time this year.
How can you help wasps?
Share your alfresco meal with a wasp. When it approaches, don't flap it away. Watch to see what it wants. In the absence of wild prey, it might be desperate for some protein (your picnic ham) to feed her brood. In the absence of flowers for nectar, it might be in need of something sugary (some jam) for her own nutrition.
My research team would also like you to share your wasp observations with us, so that we can better understand these important insects. Snap a photo of her eating and submit your data to the Wasp Picnic Survey 2026: Ham or Jam?. Keep the observations coming all summer. The wasps (and wasp scientists) will thank you.
Story Source:
Materials provided by The Conversation. Original written by Seirian Sumner, Professor of Behavioural Ecology, UCL. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.
Cite This Page: