What you need to know
- Ukraine's president says the war with Russia appears likely to continue into winter
- His comments came after talks with visiting US envoys produced no announced breakthrough
- Russian officials say Ukrainian drone attacks killed two people in separate strikes in the Perm and Belgorod regions
This blog is now closed. Here are the developments in Russia's war in Ukraine on Monday, September 7:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Russian authorities report more deaths in Ukrainian attacks
Russian authorities have reported further deaths from Ukrainian attacks, including two people killed in Russian-annexed Crimea, as Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy confirmed strikes on targets deep inside Russia.
The latest reports expand on earlier accounts of deadly drone attacks in Russia's Perm and Belgorod regions.
In Sevastopol, the Moscow-appointed governor, Mikhail Razvozhayev, said a man and a teenage girl were killed in a Ukrainian attack. Eight apartment buildings were also damaged, he said.
Russia annexed Crimea from Ukraine in 2014. Kyiv has repeatedly targeted the peninsula, which Russia uses as a military staging and supply base.
Zelenskyy confirmed that Ukrainian forces had attacked a number of targets in Russia.
He said a refinery in the Ryazan region had been damaged, while refineries in the Perm region and the Republic of Tatarstan had also been targeted.
Zelenskyy said Ukrainian forces had additionally struck targets in the Kursk region and the Black Sea.
UN rights chief urges ban on fully autonomous weapons
The UN human rights chief has called for an urgent ban on weapons that can kill without human involvement, citing reports that fully autonomous drones have already caused deaths in Ukraine.
Volker Türk said he was "horrified" by reports that Russian forces used a fully autonomous drone to kill three Ukrainians last month, while also noting reports that Ukraine had field-tested similar systems.
The New York Times reported last month that a Russian drone guided entirely by artificial intelligence killed three civilians in Zaporizhzhia in southeastern Ukraine on July 6.
According to the report, human operators had programmed the drone to travel toward a particular petrol station, but the system itself selected the precise target, thought to have been propane tanks.
Türk, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, also highlighted reports that Ukraine had tested autonomous weapons.
There has been growing pressure from international organizations and NGOs to regulate so-called lethal autonomous weapons, sometimes referred to as "killer robots."
"I join calls for the urgent prohibition of weapons that can take lives without human involvement," Türk told the UN Human Rights Council.
After years of debate, 128 countries agreed at the UN on Saturday on a definition of autonomous weapons.
NGOs have accused the United States and Russia in particular of trying to weaken the agreed language.
Zelenskyy says Russian drone targeted SBU chief's office
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said on Monday that a Russian drone which struck the headquarters of Ukraine's SBU security service in Kyiv on Friday had been aimed directly at the office of the agency's chief.
The revelation adds to the significance of one of the most high-profile Russian strikes on a Ukrainian government building since the start of the full-scale invasion.
SBU chief Oleksandr Poklad was not there at the time and was unharmed.
Zelenskyy said he had instructed the SBU to prepare an "appropriate, tangible response" and suggested Ukraine could retaliate in a similar manner.
Ukraine's Foreign Minister Andrii Sybiha called the strike a "major escalation."
Black smoke was seen rising from the SBU building, close to the UNESCO-listed St. Sophia Cathedral.
Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko said at least 12 people were wounded in the wider attack on the capital, although it was not immediately clear whether any of them were injured at the SBU headquarters.
The strike also damaged nearby buildings and shattered windows in the area.
It was the first time the SBU headquarters had been hit since Russia launched its full-scale invasion in 2022.
The SBU plays a central role in Ukraine's war effort and has carried out long-range and covert operations against Russian military targets. It was behind Operation Spiderweb in 2025, when drones targeted Russian strategic bombers at air bases deep inside Russia, as well as the 2022 bombing of the bridge linking Russia to occupied Crimea.
Russia, North Korea open first road bridge
Russia and North Korea have opened their first road bridge across the Tumen River, expanding transport links as political, economic and military ties between Moscow and Pyongyang deepen.
Ukrainian drone attacks kill 2 in Russia, officials say
Attacks with drones killed at least two people and injured several others in Russia, regional authorities have said.
One person was killed and four others were injured in Russia's Perm region after a drone attack damaged a residential building, regional Governor Dmitry Makhonin said.
He said local air defense units had shot down 27 Ukranian drones over the region, which lies deep inside Russia.
In the Belgorod region, which borders Ukraine, one person was killed and another injured in a separate Ukrainian drone attack, according to local authorities.
Reuters said it could not independently verify the reports. There was no immediate comment from Ukraine.
No end in sight after diplomatic effort, says Zelenskyy
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy has said the war with Russia currently appears likely to continue into the winter, after talks with visiting US envoys in Kyiv.
The talks produced upbeat assessments from both sides but no announced breakthrough in efforts to end the war.
"We very much hope that we will be able to reach agreements with our American partners, and we are counting on the support of our European partners if the war continues in winter - and this is how it appears at the moment," Zelenskyy said.
He also said Ukraine would hold talks with the US, France and Germany, without giving further details.
Zelenskyy again argued that the most difficult territorial issues could only be resolved in a meeting between leaders.
US envoy Steve Witkoff and Jared Kushner, US President Donald Trump's son-in-law, had traveled to Kyiv a day after meeting Russian President Vladimir Putin in Moscow.
Putin had announced a three-day pause in attacks on Kyiv for the duration of the US negotiators' visit. Ukraine, in turn, refrained from attacking Moscow during the same period.
Zelenskyy joked that the presence of Witkoff and Kushner had "worked better than the Patriot air defense systems."
It was Witkoff and Kushner's first visit to the Ukrainian capital, a repeated target of Russian strikes since the start of Moscow's full-scale invasion. The pair have made several visits to Moscow.
While Witkoff and Zelenskyy both described Sunday's talks positively, neither side announced a concrete breakthrough.
Welcome to our coverage
You join us after Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy downplayed hopes of a quick end to the conflict, saying the fighting currently appears likely to continue into winter.
He was speaking after talks in Kyiv with US envoy Steve Witkoff and Jared Kushner, US President Donald Trump's son-in-law.
Meanwhile, Russian officials say Ukrainian drone attacks have killed at least two people and injured several others.
Stay with us here for these stories and more from Russia's war in Ukraine.