What you need to know
- Cockroach Janta Party calls for peaceful nationwide protests on Friday, July 24
- Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi announces fast-track courts to punish paper-leak case accused
- Student protests continue in New Delhi and across nation
- Cockroach Janta Party urges peaceful demonstrations amid clashes
- Protests dent Modi's grip on India, experts tell DW
Here's a roundup of the biggest headlines from India on Thursday, July 23:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Cockroach party calls for nationwide protests
After an overwhelming response for the march to Parliament on July 20, the Cockroach Janta Party has called for "peaceful" nationwide protests on Friday, July 24.
"Every district, one day, one demand," the CJP poster read, with a call to "stand in solidarity with victims of police brutality across India."
The group directed local students unions and other organisations to collaborate for permissions and logistics.
The Cockraoch Janta Party was created as a satire by Abhijeet Dipke, an Indian Student of political communication in the US, after the Chief Justice of India likened the nation's youth to "parasites" and "cockroaches."
It has since gained massive momentum and support from India's youth, gaining over 23 million followers on Instagram - significantly higher that Bharatiya Janata Party's 9.4 million followers.
Despite it's meteoric popularity, the CJP does not have the network of workers and volunteers usually required for a nationwide protest.
That said, the protests in Delhi have already spread to several Indian cities like Mumbai, Bengaluru, Kolkata, Patna, Chennai and Guwahati.
Delhi police say renewed detention powers not related to protests
The Delhi police on Thursday clarified that powers granted to it under the National Security Act (NSA), to detain people as a precautionary measure, was a "routine" extension and not linked to the ongoing protests.
This comes after several Indian media outlets reported that the Delhi government had authorized the Commissioner of Police powers for a period of three months, which allowed authorities to detain individuals whose activities were considered a threat to national security.
Under the NSA, authorities can detain such individuals without formal charges for a maximum time period of 12 months.
"The order being referred to is a routine quarterly extension of powers under the National Security Act, which is renewed every three months as part of the standard administrative process," a statement posted on X said.
The latest renewal predated the protests, it added. "No Special request or order was initiated in connection with the recent events," it said.
Sonam Wangchuk offers to end hunger strike if protesters not harmed
Indian activist Sonam Wangchuk has offered to end his hunger strike if the government agrees not to harm student protesters.
He is seeking other assurances from the government including compensation for families of students who committed suicide and the resignation of India's education minister.
Protests by the Cockroach party and supporters been dissenting at the capital, New Delhi, for weeks after a scandal over leaked exam papers.
BJP Minister criticizes opposition for avoiding paper leak discussion
India's Health Minister Jagat Prakash Nadda on Thursday slammed the opposition and its leader Rahul Gandhi for "avoiding meaningful discussion" on the issue of entrance exam paper leaks in Parliament.
"Instead [they are] attempting to mislead the public on the streets, which reflects their irresponsible conduct contrary to democratic values," he said in a post on X.
Nadda's post came after opposition parties disrupted a session in the upper house of the parliament, when the government was finally willing to discuss the issue. Opposition leaders insisted that Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan resign before a discussion takes place.
"To tackle a serious challenge like paper leaks, Prime Minister Modi ji's resolve to establish fast-track courts and take the strictest action against the guilty is a clear testament to our government's sensitivity and commitment towards the youth," Nadda said, defending Modi and the ruling government.
Protests 'dented' Modi's grip on India: Experts tell DW
As youth-led protests mount across India, experts told DW that they may have dented Prime Minister Narendra Modi's grip on India, steadily built over the last 12 years.
The ruling Bharatiya Janata Party has reached the peak of its political power in terms of parliamentary seats, political analyst and author Amit Julka told DW over a call. "It's ironic that it is at this point that the BJP government, or the broader NDA government, is facing this legitimacy crisis," he said.
The protests have changed societal discourse, Julka said. "There was this mythical, transcendental, sort of aura that Modi had built up for himself. There was this era of complete hegemony over public discourse ...a lot of consent towards Modi's Government and his style of functioning. And I think that has gotten dented," Julka said.
Indian writer and political analyst Ananya Vajpeyi said that the protests were "definitely embarrassing for the government."
"They are definitely on the back foot. I don't think they expected any of this," she told DW, adding that the scale of the protests were due to political miscalculation.
That said, it is not apparent if the threat will reach the ballots of India's next national elections in 2029. According to Julka, that depends on several other factors such as welfare schemes, community bias, local political dynamics and even how the "GenZ protest" shifts narratives at the grassroots level in India.
Is Modi's resignation a formal demand?
Not really.
The Cockroach Janta Party, an accidental political pressure group formed two months ago, has been the leading organizer of the student's movement currently seen in India.
Their formal demands include Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan's resignation over a leaked medical entrance exam, monetary compensation for those impacted by the latest leak, and changes in examination procedure.
Last week, CJP Founder Abhijeet Dipke mentioned calling for Modi's resignation after authorities "forcefully" moved activist Sonam Wangchuk from the protest stage citing a high court order. Wangchuk, a renowned environmentalist and educational reformist, had joined the protest by entering an indefinite hunger strike and was moved without consent on the 21st day of his fast.
"Until now, we were demanding Dharmendra Pradhan's resignation, but after this despicable act, we will now demand the resignation of Narendra Modi," Dipke had said, upping the ante.
Since then, Dipke has not repeated his comments.
However, the protests have evolved beyond Dipke's control since the July 20 march to the parliament. Many on site have said they do not particularly support the CJP but the cause for India's education. Calls for Modi's resignation are quietly growing among them.
Protesters rage against Modi
The youth-led protest against India's education minister is steadily rolling into anger towards Prime Minister Narendra Modi as well.
"We want Modi's resignation as well. When the emperor is corrupt, the whole system becomes corrupt," one protester told DW Reporter Shalu Yadav, angry with the government's response to the protesters on July 20, when millions converged in central Delhi to march on the Indian Parliament.
Police forces met young protesters with tear gas and baton charges, with several injured on both sides. Demonstrators and politicians have been critical of India's security forces and have accused them of using excessive force against unarmed students.
"If you are not able to assure accountability to the people, if you are not able to ensure security of the people, then you should leave your post," another protester said. "I would advise that before his remaining devotees also come back to their senses, he [Modi] should resign and move on."
But not everyone places the blame at Modi's doorstep.
A man among the protesters told DW's Yadav that he had come to see the protest because his two daughters believed the government was in the wrong. But he was not convinced.
"What I can see, it is all hoodlums, nothing else, these are misguided children and they are being misguided by the so-called leaders who don't have any political space left for them," he said, speaking of the Indian opposition.
"Who got beaten? The children, the innocent children... That is not a protest, that is violence. It should not be allowed," he said, adding that Modi should take strict action against those who try to march on the Parliament.
Upper house of Parliament adjourned as opposition demands Pradhan's resignation
Rajya Sabha proceedings were adjourned till noon on Thursday, Press Trust of India reported, as opposition leaders insisted on Education Minister Dharmedra Pradhan's resignation before discussing the paper leak issue.
This came after Bharatiya Janata Party Minister of Parliamentary Affairs Kiren Rijiju said the government was ready to discuss the incident in May when the question paper of a medical entrance exam was leaked.
The news agency ANI reported that a direct face-off broke out between the ruling party and opposition party alliances, with both sides staging demonstrations on different issues.
Opposition leaders protested against Pradhan and the leaked medical exam controversy while the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance protested against the opposition's stance on blocking the discussion in parliament.
As per reports, Parliament security personnel formed a human chain between the two protesting groups to keep them apart.
Sikkim tunnel collapse: death toll rises to 22
At least seven more bodies were recovered from the tunnel of an under-construction hydroelectric project in India's northeastern state of Sikkim, authorities said. This brings the death toll to 22.
On Monday, 25 workers were trapped in the tunnel at the state-owned National Hydroelectric Power Corp Ltd project on the Teesta river, when an explosion occurred.
The explosion was suspected to have been caused by trapped methane in the rocks. The search for the remaining three workers is still underway.
"Rescue operations remain in progress, with specialized teams working in close coordination to locate and recover the remaining victims," Sikkim state government said in Facebook post.
Delhi: Metro stations near protest site closed over 'security reasons'
Some 16 metro stations in central Delhi were closed on Thursday morning until further instructions due to security reasons, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation said.
Those stations are the ones surrounding the historical protest site of Jantar Mantar, where hundreds of students and activists have been gathering for the 34th day to demand the dismissal of Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan.
The announcement came amid growing crowds at the protest site.
Since July 20, authorities have closed several metro stations around the protest site on most days in an effort to control the growing crowds. Many of the protesters are students who depend on the metro to commute to the designated area.
Meanwhile, protesters on social media alleged that police had stopped students from heading to the protest site. The authorities have not commented on the matter, but DW reporters on the scene confirmed that most protesters were able to find a way in, despite some difficulties.
Modi directs fast-track courts for paper leak case, vows 'stringent' punishment
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, on Thursday, vowed "strict and stringent" punishment for those involved in leaking entrance exam papers, while announcing fast-track courts for those accused.
"Those who try to harm the future of our youth will not be spared," Modi said in a post on X, without addressing the massive protests which have gripped the capital.
"Have directed the concerned authorities and officials to take all necessary steps in this regard. This continues our series of steps for safeguarding the interests of students," he wrote.
Students, political pressure group Cockroach Janta Party and several opposition parties continue to demonstrate against Modi's education minister Dharmendra Pradhan in central Delhi and several cities across the nation.
Their central demand is Pradhan's resignation - in lieu of accountability for the failures of the education system including a leaked medical entrance exam in May which impacted over 2 million students.
Exam paper leaks have long been a regular occurrence in India. Modi's government passed the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act in 2024 but have failed to safeguard question papers in the may exams.
The protests are now being viewed as an increasing risk to Modi's 12-year rule in India.
In response to Modi's post, the Cockroack Janta Party simply said: "Dharmendra Pradhan Must Resign."
Welcome to our coverage
Hello and welcome to DW's India news blog!
This is Mahima Kapoor reporting from the New Delhi bureau and I will be your guide through the day's biggest headlines from the country.
Student protesters continue to demonstrate against Indian Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan in New Delhi and several cities across India. That's despite strict police crackdown on protesters and growing concerns that violent miscreants are trying to hijack the movement.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi has announced a fast-track court to punish those responsible for the medical entrance exam question paper leaks - one of the events that mobilized angry students. He said this without directly addressing the protesting students.
Meanwhile, India's film fraternity is increasingly speaking up on the issue.
Stay tuned for all of this and more.