What you need to know
This blog is closed. Here's a roundup of the biggest headlines from India on Wednesday, August 12:
- Chennai airport declared a full emergency after an IndiGo flight suffered an engine failure
- The pilot of an Air India flight that suddenly lost altitude last week tested positive for marijuana
- Food safety, hygiene issues plague India's quick commerce firms
- Supreme Court urges faster adjudication of West Bengal SIR appeals
- Seven killed, more feared trapped after landslide in Mumbai
- Parliamentary panel finds charges proved against judge over burnt cash found at home
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Thanks for reading!
That's all for today!
We will be bringing you more updates tomorrow.
India, 5 southern African nations agree to open trade talks
India and the five countries that make up the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) have agreed to begin negotiations on a preferential trade agreemen (PTA).
South Africa, Botswana, Namibia, Lesotho and Eswatini are members of SACU.
SACU and India held five rounds of trade talks between 2002 and 2010, but negotiations stalled.
The move comes as India looks to secure lower tariffs on its exports, including vehicles, pharmaceuticals and industrial machinery, the Reuters news agency reported Wednesday.
Under President Donald Trump, the US has imposed a range of tariffs on many of its trading partners, including India. Washington and New Delhi are currently negotiating a bilateral trade agreement.
After the US Supreme Court struck down Trump's emergency tariffs in July, the Trump administration turned to another law in a bid to make the tariffs stick.
Cockroach founder hints at new wave of protests
Abhijeet Dipke, the founder of the youth-led Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) , has suggested that a new wave of protests could be imminent.
The movement led weeks of protests and hunger strikes calling for education reform, which culminated in the resignation of Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan on July 25.
Thousands of protesters camped out at the Jantar Mantar observatory in central Delhi.
"Many people were commenting on Instagram when Season 2 of 'Jantar-Mantar' will begin. I want to tell them that Season 2 of 'Jantar-Mantar' is going to start very soon," Dipke said Wednesday.
It was not clear when or where the next phase of protests would begin.
Similar demonstrations and rallies have since spread to other parts of the country.
The movement has emerged as one of the most serious challenges to Prime Minister Narendra Modi's 12 years in power.
Tata Sons' chairman will not seek reappointment at end of term
Indian conglomerate Tata Sons' Chairman N Chandrasekaran said on Wednesday he would not seek reappointment when his term ends in February.
The 63-year-old, who has led Tata Sons since 2017, cited a lack of board support amid tensions with the charity arm, Tata Trusts, which controls 66% of the conglomerate's holding company.
Chandrasekaran said uncertainty over the leadership situation had remained unresolved for six months and that a decision was important for employees, investors and other stakeholders.
Tata Trusts Chairman Noel Tata opposed Chandrasekaran's reappointment at a February board meeting, Reuters reported.
Seven killed, more feared trapped after landslide in Mumbai
At least seven people were killed and several injured after a landslide hit Mumbai's Kurla area early Wednesday following heavy rain, the Hindustan Times reported.
According to the report, the landslide occurred around 3 a.m. local time, with more people feared trapped, Deputy Commissioner of Police Ganesh Shinde said.
Rescue operations are underway, with teams from various emergency agencies deployed.
Mumbai has experienced heavy monsoon rain in recent weeks, causing waterlogging and disruptions to air and road traffic.
Two people killed in Mumbai fire
Two people, including a two-and-a-half-year-old, were killed and eight others injured after a fire broke out in two apartments on the 11th floor of a residential building in Mumbai late Tuesday, officials said.
The fire broke out around 10 pm in Vile Parle West area and was brought under control shortly after midnight on Wednesday.
Supreme Court urges faster adjudication of West Bengal SIR appeals
India's Supreme Court on Tuesday urged tribunals handling appeals against voter deletions in West Bengal to speed up their work, saying the process could not drag on indefinitely, a report in the Times of India said.
Nearly 3.4 million appeals are pending before tribunals set up to hear challenges to deletions from electoral rolls during a Special Intensive Revision (SIR), according to the court.
"The process cannot be so slow that the next assembly elections would be due by the time the appeals are decided," Chief Justice of India Surya Kant said, according to the report.
India's election commission conducted the SIR of electoral rolls in several states and territories ahead of state election, including West Bengal, where Prime Minister Narendra Modi's party recently won state elections.
The commission said the "intensive revision" was needed to remove the names of deceased individuals, those who have permanently moved and duplicate entries - as well as avoiding the "inclusion of the names of foreign illegal immigrants."
Critics of the SIR say it is skewed against marginalized and minority communities.
IN DEPTH: Disrupted monsoons force India to face climate threat
For generations, India has lived by the rhythm of the southwest monsoon. But with the country hit by dry spells, cloudbursts and deadly floods, climate swings now expose the costs of building for yesterday's weather.
Food safety, hygiene issues plague India's quick commerce firms
India's quick commerce sector, especially grocery delivery services, is in the doldrums as authorities flag serious food safety and hygiene violations.
Authorities in the southern Karnataka and western Maharashtra states sealed a Zepto warehouse on Tuesday and suspended the license of a Blinkit facility after inspections found serious violations, reports said.
In Karnataka, a Zepto warehouse near Bengaluru was sealed by the food safety department after finding unhygienic food handling and storage conditions, improper labelling and misbranding.
Zepto said in a statement that it had cooperated with officials and was taking steps to address their observations, the Hindustan Times reported, adding that it remained committed to food safety and hygiene standards.
In Mumbai, authorities suspended the license of a Blinkit facility after finding a large-scale cockroach infestation, improperly stored food and expired or tampered products.
Food was also found on rusted racks, while cold-storage areas lacked adequate cleanliness.
The facility has been barred from selling or distributing food or conducting any food business during the license suspension, authorities said.
Air India pilot tests positive in drug test
The captain of an Air India flight from Phuket to Delhi that suddenly lost altitude last week tested positive for marijuana in a confirmatory drug test.
The Airbus A320neo, carrying 137 passengers and eight crew, lost about 300 feet of over Odisha before landing safely in Delhi.
The plane stabilized and landed safely. India's Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau has classified the incident as serious.
The incident had left 13 passengers and four crew members injured, and led to India's aviation ministry summoning Air India CEO Campbell Wilson on Tuesday.
Emergency at Chennai airport after IndiGo plane suffers engine failure
Late on Tuesday night, Chennai airport declared a full emergency after an IndiGo flight suffered an engine failure, media reports said.
This came only a few hours after reports emerged that the captain of an Air India flight that suddenly lost altitude last week, injuring crew and passengers, tested positive in a drug test, further plunging India's aviation into turmoil.
On Tuesday, the pilot of an IndiGo plane, flying from Kolkata to Chennai with 224 people on board, noticed that the left engine had failed while the plane prepared to land, reports said Airports Authority of India (AAI) officials.
Airport authorities activated emergency response measures, which remained in place till the plane landed safely. The declaration of full emergency was withdrawn soon after.
Welcome to our coverage
Hello! This is Shakeel from DW's New Delhi Studio bringing you the latest updates from across India.
The turbulence in Indian aviation continues, as Chennai airport declared a full emergency on Tuesday after an IndiGo flight suffered an engine failure. This comes on the heels of reports that the captain of an Air India flight that suddenly lost altitude last week, injuring crew and passengers, has tested positive in a drug test.
Meanwhile, quick-commerce firms Zepto and Blinkit are under the scanner over "serious food safety and hygiene violations." Your deliveries may still arrive within minutes, but in what condition? That's the question.
For all this and more, stay tuned to our blog.