What you need to know
- Trump says US will attack Iranian bridges and power plants if ships in Strait of Hormuz come under fire
- Iran's foreign minister says his country's defense doctrine calls for 'an eye for an eye'
- Fuel prices have soared as Iran continues to block the Strait of Hormuz and Houthis attack Saudi shipping in the Red Sea
- Pentagon chief Pete Hegseth requests fresh funding for Iran war in remarks to senators
- US attacked Iran for 11th consecutive night, CENTCOM says
This blog is now closed. For the latest on Thursday, please read here.
Follow below for the latest developments on the US war with Iran and news from the wider Middle East:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Iran's foreign minister says its doctrine is 'eye for an eye'
Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi issued a short statement in English on Wednesday evening threatening reprisals if the US attacks Iranian infrastructure.
"Our defense doctrine is clear: eye for an eye," Araghchi wrote. "Any aggression against Iran, including our infrastructure, will compel a powerful and decisive response."
Iran is not in a position to strike at US infrastructure or targets on the mainland to match Trump's threats issued on Wednesday, and so Araghchi included a renewed warning to its regional neighbors.
"Those who contribute to such aggression, whatever the kind of support, will also be considered legitimate targets," he said.
Iranian negotiator Qalibaf: 'no one will sell oil' in a region where we do not sell oil
Iran's chief negotiator and parliamentary speaker, Mohammad Baqer Qalibaf, has issued an online post saying that the "equation of this war is clear: either all or none!"
He was making the comments soon after Trump's threat of attacking Iranian infrastructure if Iran attacks commercial ships in the Strait of Hormuz.
"In a region where we do not sell oil, no one will sell oil," Qalibaf wrote. "If our security is not ensured, no infrastructure will be safe, and the security of the strait is in the absence of American forces."
He concluded by saying Iran had "repeatedly" said the situation of the Strait of Hormuz would not "return to pre-war conditions," without specifying exactly what he meant. But it appears to be a reference to Iranian calls for the introduction of fees or at least some kind of authorization system for ships passing through the strait, even though it's on the open sea not an inland waterway.
Trump attends ceremony for 4 soldiers killed in action in region last week
US President Donald Trump has attended what's known as a "dignified transfer" ceremony, meeting the remains of four service members killed in action at the airfield where they were returned from the Middle East.
Trump, Secretary of Defense Pete Hegseth and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Dan Caine all attended the ceremony at Dover Air Force Base in Delaware on Wednesday. The base is home to the largest US military mortuary.
Officials saluted as four cases draped with the Stars and Stripes flag were carried off a military transport plane and into vehicles waiting on the runway.
Trump was scheduled to meet privately with grieving family members. Asked what he was going to tell the families of the fallen, he said: "All I'm going to say is, we love you. We love your child, and that's what they are to them. They're their children. There's no games, no nothing."
The White House said one of the families will be on Air Force One later Wednesday when Trump flies to an event in Georgia, where the family lives.
Three of the soldiers were killed when an Iranian missile hit their barracks at Muwaffaq Salti Air Base in Jordan on Friday. The other died in an incident in Erbil in Iraqi Kurdistan on Sunday, during a controlled detonation of an attack drone.
Signs of ships avoiding second choke point off Yemen after Houthi warnings: tracker data
Houthi threats to ships headed to or from Saudi Arabia's western shoreline could further impact commercial shipping, data trackers are warning.
The Houthis, who have de facto control over much of Yemen, have declared a naval blockade on Saudi Arabia and told ships to avoid the Bab el-Mandeb Strait, the gateway to the Red Sea on the opposite side of the Arabian Peninsula from the Strait of Hormuz. It provides access to western Saudi coastal cities like Jeddah and Yanbu.
Data provider Kpler said shipping in both waterways was "under pressure," saying traffic in both straits had fallen sharply.
Ship broker Clarksons issued a similar warning, saying four vessels had registered new courses on Wednesday, avoiding the Bab el-Mandeb Strait and heading north through the Suez Canal towards the Mediterranean instead.
"The threat of Houthi hostile actions against Saudi Arabia ... has begun to have an overall effect on tanker activity," Clarksons wrote. "There are reports of several tankers, having loaded in Saudi Arabia's Yanbu port in the Red Sea, that have shifted course towards the Suez Canal rather than sail south towards the Bab el-Mandeb Strait, while others are holding their positions waiting for further instruction."
For ships headed to places like India, Pakistan, Indonesia or Australia, doing this would add well over 10,000 nautical miles (more than 20,000 kilometers) and weeks at sea to the typical travel distance.
"Anything that restricts shipping through the Red Sea would be problematic for the same reasons that the Strait of Hormuz is problematic," US Secretary of State Marco Rubio said on the sidelines of a regional summit in the Philippines on Wednesday.
Pakistan's Foreign Ministry on Wednesday warned that the actions "threaten regional security, undermine freedom of navigation, challenge the rules-based maritime order and jeopardize uninterrupted flow of global commerce."
The Reuters news agency cited an advisory from the European Union's Aspides naval mission in the Red Sea as saying that ships with links to Israel, the United States or Saudi Arabia were at a higher risk of being attacked by the Houthis and were advised to avoid voyages through the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden until the threat level decreases.
Trump threatens to destroy 'bridge or power plant' for every attack on a ship in Strait of Hormuz
US President Donald Trump has issued a social media post threatening that the US will start striking Iranian infrastructure in response to future attacks on ships in the Strait of Hormuz.
"From this point forward, any time the Islamic Republic of Iran shoots at a ship in the Strait of Hormuz, whether it be by Missile, Rocket, Drone, or any other device or weapon, the United States will bomb and destroy ONE BRIDGE OR POWER PLANT, including those located next to, or in, the Capital City of Tehran," Trump wrote on his Truth Social platform.
Targeting key civilian infrastructure, such as power generation systems or bridges, is deemed a war crime in international humanitarian law, as is deliberately targeting civilian or commercial shipping.
KLM airline extends halt to Middle East flights
KLM Royal Dutch Airlines has extended its limits on flights to the Middle East amid the ongoing conflict. It said on its website that previous limits on flights to the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia would be extended from their previous end date of August 23.
"KLM will not operate flights to Dubai, Riyadh and Dammam until and including September 6," it said in updates on its website.
The airline first restricted services on February 28 when the figthing first broke out and various airspaces in the region were closed.
Along with many other major airlines, KLM has periodically extended these limitations since, with the last such extension taking place on July 1.
Dubai in the UAE is close to the Strait of Hormuz, while Dammam is on Saudi Arabia's eastern coast near Bahrain. The capital, Riyadh, is further inland but still in the eastern half of the country.
Saudi Arabia issues brief warning for Dammam, near Bahrain on east coast
Saudi Arabia's civil defense agency briefly warned residents of the eastern city of Dammam to take shelter on Wednesday.
Minutes later, the GDCD lifted the order and said the danger had passed.
Around the same time, air raid sirens were activated in Bahrain.
Dammam is a coastal city on the Persian Gulf or Gulf of Arabia that's just a short distance from the island kingdom of Bahrain, with the two areas connected by the giant series of bridges known as the King Fahd Causeway.
Of the Gulf states with ties to the US, Iran has tended to fire at the major player, Saudi Arabia, less frequently amid the conflict, more typically attacking sites in Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar or the United Arab Emirates.
Iran denies conducting nuclear activities at 'Pickaxe Mountain'
Iran has denied engaging in nuclear activities at the site known as "Pickaxe Mountain" in the center of the country.
In a post on X, Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman Ismail Baghai described US reports on the matter as "nothing more than a fabricated pretext for aggression, destruction, and sabotage."
He also added that Iran's nuclear activities have been fully reported to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
US President Donald Trump threatened to launch attacks on a fortified underground site known as "Pickaxe Mountain," located in the Kuh-e Kolang mountain range, south of the Natanz nuclear facility in central Iran.
"We'll be hitting that area pretty soon, and very heavily," Trump told reporters on Tuesday.
Brent oil price soars above $95 a barrel
Amid the escalating conflict in the Middle East, world oil prices soared on Wednesday. The main contract, futures for Brent North Sea crude, surpassed $95 (€83) per barrel for the first time in nearly six weeks.
Brent oil jumped 4.4% to $95.02 per barrel, while the key US contract, West Texas Intermediate, rallied 4.5% to $88.16.
The US attacked Iran overnight from Tuesday to Wednesday for the eleventh consecutive night. Meanwhile, on Tuesday, the Houthis threatened to attack oil tankers calling at Saudi ports on the Red Sea.
The Red Sea has become the main alternate route for millions of barrels of Saudi oil per day, as Iran has threatened shipping through the Strait of Hormuz.
Pakistan condemns Houthis' threats against Saudi Arabia
Pakistan expressed deep concern over attempts to draw Saudi Arabia into the war in the Middle East and condemned threats by Yemen's Houthi rebels against the kingdom and shipping in the Red Sea.
"Pakistan is deeply concerned by attempts to drag the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia into the conflict in the Middle East, and it reiterates its unwavering support for the security, sovereignty, territorial integrity, and prosperity of the brotherly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia," said the Pakistan's Foreign Ministry in a statement.
It also said the country reserves the right to use force to protect its own interests.
The move comes as the Yemen's Houthis, who control the coast at the mouth of the Red Sea, announced a naval blockade on Saudi Arabia.
Pakistan, a nuclear power, maintains a far-reaching military alliance with Saudi Arabia.
Lebanon PM calls for 'complete Israeli withdrawal'
Lebanese Prime Minister Nawaf Salam said that Beirut is working toward a "complete Israeli withdrawal" from occupied areas during a visit to a village in the south of the country where the Lebanese army recently deployed.
"We will continue mobilizing our political and diplomatic efforts to secure a complete Israeli withdrawal from the south," he said in Zawtar al-Gharbiya.
This battered village is one of several "pilot zones" intended to demonstrate the Lebanese army's ability to remove and disarm the Iran-backed Hezbollah as part of a Washington-sponsored deal with Israel.
Salam's visit to the village comes a day after President Joseph Aoun's meeting with US President Donald Trump at the White House, where Aoun said he "stressed the urgent need for a full Israeli withdrawal from Lebanese territory."
Trump promised to support the Lebanese government's efforts to establish state control throughout the country.
According to the agreement signed last month, the Lebanese army is supposed to disarm Hezbollah militants in the "pilot zones" where it will operate. This will ban military activity by any non-state groups and should pave the way for future Israeli withdrawals from other areas.
However, the Iran-backed group has repeatedly rejected the agreement and refuses to lay down its weapons.
Trump to witness return of US soldiers killed in Middle East
President Donald Trump on Wednesday will attend a ceremony for four US service members who were killed in Iranian attacks in the Middle East. Their bodies will return to American soil in flag-draped caskets.
Trump will travel to Dover Air Force Base in Delaware for the ceremony, known as a "dignified transfer."
The three US service members who were killed when an Iranian missile hit their sleeping barracks at the Muwaffaq Salti Air Base in Jordan on Friday were First Lieutenant Tyler James Feehan, 25; Sergeant Angel S. Rampersad, 28; and Private Isabella Gonzales, 19.
Sergeant Michael Emmanuel Swinton, 30, died on Sunday in a separate incident in Erbil, Iraq, during a controlled detonation of an attack drone.
Eighteen US service members have been killed since the Iran war began on February 28.
Jordan army says it intercepted four Iranian missiles
The Jordanian army said it intercepted four Iranian missiles, while two others fell in an open area.
"Air defence systems today detected six missiles coming from Iranian territory," the military said in a statement.
They added that they "intercepted and downed four missiles, while the other two fell in two remote, uninhabited areas without causing any human casualties or material damage."
Earlier, the Iranian army said it targeted accommodations and equipment storage facilities at the Al-Azraq Air Base in Jordan.
Iran executes one more person over January protests
Iran has executed a man on charges linked to protests in January, according to the judiciary's Mizan news agency.
Mizan identified the man as Mehdi Khaneki and said he was executed for "operational actions" that benefited Israel, the United States, and hostile groups. The agency also reported that he produced and possessed weapons.
The report did not specify the exact time of the execution. To date, the Iranian judiciary has executed at least 25 men in connection with the protests and subsequent unrest according to the German DPA news agency.
Demonstrations broke out in Iran amid the country's economic crisis in late December. These demonstrations quickly escalated into mass protests against the authoritarian leadership. However, the Iranian government violently suppressed the protests, killing thousands of demonstrators.
Iran hits US bases in Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait, Iranian media report
The Iranian army said it targeted US forces in Jordan, Bahrain and Kuwait, according to reports from the Iranian state-run media.
The army said it attacked with drones accommodations and equipment storage facilities at the Al-Azraq Air Base in Jordan, as well as equipment warehouses and aircraft maintenance hangars at the Sheikh Isa Air Base in Bahrain.
The Iranian army also reportedly launched a large-scale drone strike against US military facilities at Camp Doha in western Kuwait. The attack targeted ammunition storage sites and logistics infrastructure supporting American ground forces.
There has been no confirmation of these attacks by the US yet.