Hayden Panettiere, best known for her roles in US TV shows "Heroes" and "Nashville," has died aged 36, US media reports said.
"It is with profound sadness that we share the tragic passing of our beloved Hayden. She was an incredible light and a force of nature who brought immeasurable love and joy to all who knew her - and to the millions who watched her onscreen," Panettiere's father, Skip, was quoted by ABC news as saying.
The cause of Panettiere's death has not yet been announced. Her father has urged for privacy.
She would have turned 37 on Friday,
Who was Hayden Panettiere?
Panettiere began her career as a child actor, featuring in commercials and soap operas.
She gained widespread recognition as the voice of Dot, the young princess ant in Pixar's 1998 animated success "A Bug's Life."
She earned a Grammy nomination for the film's children's spoken word album recorded a few years after its release.
Panettiere catapulted to fame with her role as Claire Bennett - a high school cheerleader with super powers - on NBC's television series "Heroes," which debuted in 2006 and went on to be a hit.
She also starred as up-and-coming country singer Juliette Barnes for six seasons on the musical drama "Nashville."
Panettiere also worked in two films of the satirical horror "Scream" franchise, "Bring It On: All Or Nothing," "I Love You Beth Cooper" and "Remember the Titans."
Her last appearance was in the psychological thriller "Sleepwalker," which released in the US in January this year.
Panettiere was vocal about her struggles
Panettiere was open about her struggles with alcohol addiction and depression.
She revealed that she had had dealt with addiction through her 20s.
Her younger brother - actor Jansen Panettiere - died in 2023 at 28 due to a heart condition.
Hayden's memoir was published earlier this year, where she spoke about her battle with mental health, the loss of her brother, and her decision to give full custody of her daughter to her former partner, Ukrainian boxer Wladimir Klitschko.
Edited by: Natalie Muller
Don't let the algorithm hide the news. If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google, so you'll always see our verified news first.