What you need to know
- A student activist has appealed Delhi's High Court to declare mass surveillance of protesters unconstitutional
- Solicitor General Tushar Mehta defended the Indian police's conduct during the CJP protest
- The Assam and Bihar governments have agreed to drop charges against some protesters
This blog is now closed. Here is a roundup of the biggest headlines from India on Tuesday, July 28:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click hereto add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Court halts demolition of Mohammad Ali Jauhar University in Rampur
Moradabad Divisional Commissioner's court on Monday has blocked the proposed demolition of 38 buildings at Mohammad Ali Jauhar University until a final hearing in the case.
A demolition notice was issued for 38 of 40 buildings at Mohammad Ali Jauhar University, which was founded by Samajwadi Party leader Azam Khan in Uttar Pradesh's Rampur city.
The authorities issued the demolition notice saying these structures were constructed without permission.
The university was given 15 days' time to remove the "unauthorized" construction, adding the administration will proceed with the demolition if the institution fails to comply.
Mohammad Ali Jauhar University has been mired in controversy over its acquistion of land, and in 2023 the government of Uttar Pradesh terminated its lease, resulting in a drawn-out court battle.
Bihar, Assam to withdraw cases against protesters
Hours after the CJP issued a statement over a breach of their demand to withdraw police cases against protesters - the ruling BJP's Bihar and Assam governments said that all such charges will be dropped and protesters detained before 6 pm on July 26 will be released.
The party's West Bengal government, however, has not given any such assurances.
Union ministers JP Nadda and Jitendra Singh had assured the the party that no action would be taken against peaceful protesters, news agency PTI reported.
In a press release issued by the Home and Political Department the Assam government said five cases had been registered in Assam in connection with the protests, leading to the arrest of 13 people.
"No adverse legal action will be initiated by any of the Police authorities within the State against those persons who have been involved in these protests," the press release said.
The statement said that the process of withdrawing the registered cases, irrespective of the stage of proceedings within Assam, will be initiated promptly as per law.
According to the police, altogether 694 people had been detained for participating in the protests in Bihar.
The Bihar government also announced that it will withdraw all cases lodged against protesters over the NEET paper leak and release those jailed under various charges.
Probe finds RAF personnel were issued pellet guns during CJP protest
An internal inquiry has found that at least a dozen personnel of the Rapid Action Force (RAF) were issued pellet guns on the morning of July 20 to quell the CJP protests.
The weapons were withdrawn on July 23 after allegations that they were used to harm the protesters, according to a report by Indian newspaper The Hindustan Times.
RAF is a specialized unit within the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) deployed to handle riots and other public disturbances across the country.
Reportedly, five people have alleged that they were hit with pellets on July 20.
The probe has quoted a CRPF inspector as saying that he didn't issue any order to fire the pellet guns, the officials cited above added.
However, a general diary entry filed at Parliament Street police station reveals that the Rapid Action Force (RAF) fired two rounds from an anti-riot gun on the directions of a Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) rank officer of the police, as reported by the Indian newspaper The Hindu.
Modi government faces challenge from activists over AI use at CJP protest
Activists in India have challenged Narendra Modi's government over the use of AI-powered surveillance during the Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) protest.
The controversy erupted when protesters and media reports showed a police surveillance van equipped with cameras on a telescopic mast providing a 360-degree view of the gathering.
Student activist Aishe Ghosh has asked the Delhi High Court to declare mass surveillance of protesters unconstitutional.
She also wants the court to order the destruction of all personal data collected during the CJP demonstration.
India has no law governing the use of facial recognition technology by police and surveillance at the main protest site in New Delhi was a breach of the law, activists say.
During the case's hearing, Solicitor General Tushar Mehta defended the Indian police conduct, saying privacy claims at a public gathering were "ironical" and the checks were "absolutely necessary" and "in legitimate state interest."
Welcome to our coverage
Hello! This is Midhat from the New Delhi bureau bringing you the latest news from India.
After witnessing one of the biggest protests in years, people in India woke up to the aftermath of the demonsrations as mass arrests, detentions, and government surveillance made their way to the headlines.
Activists in India have challenged the Indian government over the use of AI-powered surveillance during the Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) protests.
However, some state governments have said that the charges against the protesters will be dropped.
Meanwhile, an internal probe has revealed security personnel were issued pellet guns to quell the CJP protest.
Stay tuned as we bring you all this and more from India.