A year ago, North Korea's women successfully defended their U-17 World Cup title after defeating the Netherlands 3-0 in Morocco. It was the fourth time that the country has won the competition.
Now the country's U-20 team enter the World Cup in Poland as defending champions, having won their third World Cup in 2024. North Korea's women have clearly cemented their status as the dominant force in women's youth football.
But what is it that makes a state that, according to the United Nations, "does not have any parallel in the contemporary world," so good at youth football?
"International sport is one of the few ways to demonstrate their sovereignty, existence and identity to the international community, so this type of big success, from their point of view, is an important occasion where they can wave their national flag in front of the international audience," Dr Jung Woo Lee, a senior lecturer in Sport and Leisure Policy at the University of Edinburgh, told DW.
"At the same time, domestically, North Korea often uses sport as their propaganda tool to glorify their leaders and also how great their country is."
A clear and conscious strategy
Football is popular in the country, but recognizing that the gap to the top in senior football is much harder to close than in youth football, North Korea's leaders turned to women's youth football, where the gap is more manageable. It's also why success at this level hasn't benefited the senior team over the years. This strategy is not about pathways. It's about winning.
"The gap between established and developing clubs is also high because in many European countries, there is a professional league, and they get more support from a number of different stakeholders," Lee said.
"In youth football, I think European sport organizations highlight more on having fun when playing football. Whereas in North Korea, even if you are 13 or 14 years old, they join very highly disciplined, highly systematic and highly professionalized training regimes, so in early ages they can excel."
In Morocco, North Korea's U-17 team only conceded three goals in the entire tournament, and scored three or more on four occasions. This was a continuation of their form the year before, while the U-20 women in 2024 not only beat Argentina 6-2 but also secured three straight 1-0 victories from the quarterfinals onwards to win the tournament.
With the help of the Pyongyang International Football School where young girls are selected, developed and educated following a highly disciplined and scientific approach, North Korea has seen an opportunity and taken it.
Regime positioning, life-changing rewards
In the eyes of North Korea, this is also a victory for the state itself.
"You need to remember that North Korea still maintains a very strong socialist and communist regime," Lee explained. "Particularly under Kim Jong Un, they try to compare capitalist and communist regimes and show the communist regime as superior to the capitalist. Also, when I look at some of the news reports about the North Korean performance in North Korean media, they highlighted that because they are (under) the communist regime, they do whatever they can, even if they're physically exhausted.
"Then they directly compare those mentalities with capitalist countries. In capitalism, when athletes are physically exhausted and injured, there is no way to perform. They need to be changed by their coach. But in socialist systems their will is more important than (a) professional opinion from the coach or any medical staff. So North Korea frames that as a superior system."
That psychological element has seemingly given the team an edge, but beyond a strong sense of patriotism and years of disciplined work lies the motivation of a life-changing reward.
"Although we often see North Korea as quite underdeveloped and very much agricultural and people experiencing hardship, those living in Pyongyang are quite different. They are kind of special," Lee explained.
As an incentive, he said, the regime can give players living outside the capital residence certificates, which are required to enter Pyongyang. At the same time, many players have been given apartments.
This motivation is not to be underestimated. Life in rural North Korea is tough, with shortages in food and health care reportedly common. Living in the big city is quite different.
"This is a way to change their life. It's kind of winning a lottery in a way," Lee explained.
What next for talented generation?
For star players such as Yu Jong-hyang, topscorer at the 2025 U-17 World Cup, or Choe Il-son, a key player in both U-17 and U-20 World Cup victories in 2024, the instinctive reaction is to wonder which WSL (English top division) or NWSL(US top division) team will be trying to sign her, but that would be to forget the context in which she both lives and plays.
"I don't think it's impossible, but not so easy," Lee said of the idea of either stars playing abroad.
"First of all, (there are) the economic sanctions now imposed on North Korea," he added. "And also, whenever North Korean players joined a European league - there were a few occasions in basketball where any salary was not sent to the individual account of the players or the agent, but it goes to North Korea's government account, so I think that's another complexity involved."
While much about this team, like the country, remains a mystery, there is no denying that success at the youth level has always been the plan.
Edited by: Chuck Penfold
This article was originally published on September 9, 2024. It was updated on November 9, 2025 to reflect North Korea's U-17 World Cup title win. It was also updated on September 4, 2026 ahead of the kickoff of the U-20 World Cup in Poland.