What you need to know
- The US conducted its first strikes on Iran in weeks
- The strikes targeted Iranian rocket launchers on Larak Island in the Strait of Hormuz
- Iran's Revolutionary Guard said it struck Jordan in retaliation
- US President Donald Trump vows response to Iranian strikes
This blog is now closed. Thank you for reading.
Read below for top headlines from the Iran war and other developments in the Middle East region on Monday, August 31, 2026.
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Tanker reportedly struck near Strait of Hormuz - UK maritime officials
The United Kingdom Maritime Trade Operations agency (UKMTO) said that a tanker had reportedly been struck by three projectiles while exiting the Strait of Hormuz.
The Royal Navy sponsored maritime security organization said the incident took place east of Khasab, Oman and that authorities were investigating.
The UKMTO said that no casualties or environmental impact had been reported.
Denmark reopens its embassy in Syria
After a years-long suspension of diplomatic activities that began when Syria's civil war erupted, Denmark reopened its embassy in Damascus.
According to the state news agency SANA, Danish Foreign Minister Lars Lokke Rasmussen reopened the outpost "after a 14-year-long break," accompanied by Syrian Foreign Minister Asaad al-Shaibani.
"A new chapter is being written in Syrian-Danish relations, and this step encourages the rest of the European countries to invest in Syria and follow suit," Shaibani said, according to SANA.
Several European countries closed their embassies and severed diplomatic relations with longtime ruler Bashar Assad after his government violently suppressed pro-democracy demonstrations in 2011. This sparked a civil war that has lasted nearly 14 years.
In March of that year, Germany officially reopened its embassy in Damascus during a visit by the country's foreign minister.
Trump sent message to Iran, Vance said
US Vice President JD Vance said President Donald Trump used social media to send out a message to Iran.
"The President likes to switch it up on social media a little bit," Vance said.
"He would be the first to say he doesn't make announcements about military actions on social media, but I think that he's sending a message to the Iranians," he added.
Trump used his Truth Social account to post an AI-generated video clip with a one line about Kharg Island, Iran's energy hub, being blown to pieces.
Oil prices rise, stocks fall after US, Iran blows
Oil prices rose and stocks fell as another exchange of blows between the US and Iran took place.
The price of Brent crude, the international standard, rose to $90.91 (€77.48) per barrel, with the S&P index falling 0.4%. The Nasdaq fell 0.3%.
The losses were suffered by all sectors, with energy stocks largely being the exception.
Exxon Mobil stocks rose 2.9% and Chevron rose 3%.
Lebanon calls on Greece to support ceasefire agreement with Israel
Lebanese President Joseph Aoun asked Greece to support Beirut in implementing the deal to end the war with Israel.
"Trying to solve the problem through military force will not succeed," Aoun said during a meeting with Greek counterpart Constantine Tassoulas and Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis.
According to Aoun, Lebanon's people are "tired" of wars.
"We ask Greece to do all it can to help Lebanon in implementing the agreement," the Lebanese leader pleaded.
Iran's president says country not interested in war
Iran President Masoud Pezeshkian said the country is not interested in the extension of the war with the US.
This comes as the two sides traded blows for the first time in over a month.
According to Pezeshkian, Iran is interested in a "path of agreement and understanding," while also adding the war is "neither in our interest nor in the interest of the region."
The Iranian leader spoke at the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation summit in Kyrgyzstan.
No ships hit by Iranian mines, US military says
The US military said that Iran's claim that two mines had hit a supertanker in the Strait of Hormuz is not true.
"No ships have hit mines in the Strait of Hormuz," US Central Command said on X.
"This is yet another IRGC attempt to intimidate regional commercial shipping through disinformation," it added, in reference to Iran's Revolutionary Guards.
The original claim came from Iranian state TV, which cited a Revolutionary Guards statement.
Earlier, the US military said strikes on Iran's Larak Island targeted IRGC minelaying forces to prevent Iran from further mining the strait.
Trump vows response to Iranian strikes
US President Donald Trump said there will be a reaction to Iran's missile launches at US targets in Jordan.
"We're going to hit them hard, there will be a response," Trump was quoted by Fox News as saying.
According to the report, all of Iran's missiles were intercepted, except one, which was allowed to pass as it had been identified as not going to hit "anything significant."
UAE responds to Iran drone incursion
The United Arab Emirates said its air force engaged an Iranian drone on Monday, coming after the US struck Iran for the first time in weeks, triggering Tehran's retaliation.
"The Ministry of Defense announced that the UAE Air Force responded to a UAV detected over the country's territorial waters, approaching from Iran," the Defense Ministry said in a statement on X.
The statement did not provide further details on the drone's target, or whether it was shot down.
Earlier Monday, Iranian state television reported US forces and helicopters were targeted with drones at the UAE's Al Minhad Air Base. In a separate statement, the UAE Defense Ministry said "such reports are false."
Iran says retaliatory strikes on US bases 'legitimate defense'
Iran's Foreign Ministry on Monday condemned US attacks on Larak Island, and said strikes on US bases in response were "in accordance with the inherent right of legitimate defense."
Iran on Monday said its forces struck US military bases in Jordan and the United Arab Emirates.
The US bases in Jordan were used in the attacks on the island, which killed and injured Iranian armed forces members and civilians, the Foreign Ministry said in a statement.
In a separate statement on Iranian state media, Iran's Revolutionary Guards said two US air bases in Jordan were damaged by ballistic missiles.
Citing Iran's army, Iranian state television reported US forces and helicopters were targeted with drones at the Al Minhad Air Base in the United Arab Emirates.
The US military has not yet commented on the reports of Iranian retaliatory attacks.
Iran says oil tanker hits mines in Strait of Hormuz
Iran's Revolutionary Guard (IRGC) said a "rogue supertanker" struck two naval mines in the southern Strait of Hormuz while attempting to "illegally" traverse the waterway, state television reported on Monday.
The tanker caught fire and was brought to a standstill, the report said, without providing information about the vessel's identity or the condition of crew.
The IRGC warned any ships against not complying with its rules of passage through the Strait of Hormuz.
Earlier, the US military said strikes on Iran's Larak Island targeted IRGC minelaying forces to prevent Iran from further mining the strait.
US military says latest strikes were 'limited, precise action'
The US military's Central Command has rejected Iranian claims that its Sunday strikes were an act of aggression.
"US forces took limited, precise action against IRGC minelaying forces posing an imminent threat in the Strait of Hormuz," it said on social media.
"In essence, Iran created the threat and the US military eliminated it to protect civilian mariners, commercial shipping, and the free flow of global commerce."
Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps had earlier called the US strikes an "act of aggression" aimed at resolving "domestic problems" and its "diminished credibility."
IRGC attacks US air bases in Jordan, Iranian state media reports
Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) said it retaliated for earlier American strikes on Larak Island by firing ballistic missiles at American positions in Jordan.
The IRGC said it caused "heavy damage" on what it referred to as the King Hussein base and the Al-Azraq base, both in Jordan.
The Jordanian army said it intercepted eight missiles that entered its airspace.
US sources also said that nearly all of the missiles had been intercepted, according to Fox News' chief international correspondent Trey Yingst.
US redirected dozens of ships to enforce Iran blockade
US forces have redirected dozens of ships as part of efforts to enforce a maritime blockade against Iran, the US Central Command said on Sunday night.
The US imposed a naval blockade on Iran in April, after Iran blocked most international shipping in the Strait of Hormuz in late February.
"As of August 30, CENTCOM forces have redirected 83 commercial vessels, disabled 3 and boarded 2 to ensure compliance with the blockade," CENTCOM said on social media.
US forces attack Iran for first time in weeks
US forces reportedly stuck Iranian military sites in the Strait of Hormuz on Sunday night - the first US strikes on Iran in over a month.
"Earlier today, US forces struck two Iranian launchers on Larak Island," US Navy Captain Tim Hawkins said in a message to the AFP news agency.
"Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps forces were observed preparing to launch rockets with sea mines into the Strait of Hormuz."
Iranian media reported explosions near Larak Island.
The US said last week that it had finished clearing Iranian sea mines from the strait's international shipping routes.
The IRGC said in a statement that the attack on Sunday night "will be answered by the sons of Iran and will result in the punishment of the aggressor."