Canadian Prime Minister Mark Carney was addressing the European Parliament on Thursday, in a speech that focused on Canada's and the European Union's shared security and economic interests.
In an address in which Carney spoke in English, French and German, the Canadian prime minister lauded European culture and values of democracy, freedom and human rights, which he said Canada shares.
"We are not fair-weather allies. We do not pursue zero-sum deals. Our commitment to the rule of law, and our unyielding defense of human dignity, individual freedom and democracy share the same deep roots, the same unwavering dedication," the Canadian leader told the chamber, to applause.
Europe and Canada are 'stronger together', Carney tells EU Parliament
"We hold common values for which we have always fought and in whose defense we must always remain vigilant," he said.
Carney also said his country "welcomes" the "ambition" of the EU's proposal of an "associated membership".
"Europe and Canada are each strong," he said. But he added that "Europe and Canada are even stronger together."
"I am not proposing a third bloc in order to become a great-power rival - only with better manners," he said. "We do not seek power to dominate others."
"The objective is not self-sufficiency, it's collective resilience", Carney said.
His speech to European lawmakers comes as the EU and Canada look to strengthen their ties amid a growing rift between Canada and its southern neighbor and main trading partner, the US.
Ties between Canada and the US have hit a historic low in recent months, with the North American neighbors locked in an escalating trade war since Carney and US President Donald Trump failed to agree on a deal this summer.
EU defends Canada alliance plan after Trump tariffs threat
On Wednesday, the European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said the EU was willing to make Canada its first-ever "associate member," days after the Wall Street Journal reported that Carney was exploring an "associate membership" with the bloc, a position that does not currently exist.
During her State of the EU address, von der Leyen said the bloc needed to adapt to an "openly hostile world" marked by aggressive power politics and "frayed relationships," the latter a clear nod to the turbulent ties between Brussels and Washington since Trump returned to the White House.
Prior to his visit this week, Carney had confirmed that he wanted to establish a "unique alliance" between Canada and the EU.
"We share the same values, we have the same priorities and we have very complementary strengths," the prime minister said.
Trump on Wednesday slammed the EU's plans to make Canada an associate member.
"If they do that, if I think it's at all a hostile act, I will put very serious tariffs or stop trading with Europe on many things," Trump told reporters en route to an event in North Carolina. The US president also described the prospect of Canada joining the EU as "laughable."
How did the US-Canada relationship come to this?
Ties between Canada and the US have plummeted since Trump began his second term in January 2025. He has targeted Canada with tariffs and suggested that the US could annex Canada as its 51st state.
Trump has also referred to Carney, as well as his predecessor as prime minister, Justin Trudeau, as the "governor" of Canada.
The growing rift has also seen Trump sign an executive order renaming Lake Ontario, a Great Lake between the US and Canada, to "Lake America."
Edited by: Elizabeth Schumacher
If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google, so you'll always see our verified news first.