What you need to know
This blog has ended. Thank you for joining us.
For the latest on the US-Iran war on Friday, July, head over to our blog.
Below are the main developments on the US war with Iran and news from the Middle East on Friday, July 24:
- Saudi-led coalition strikes the Houthi-held Yemeni port city of Hodeida
- The attacks come after Yemen's Iran-backed Houthi rebels claimed several strikes on Saudi oil tankers as part of its Red Sea blockade
- The Houthis claim Bab al-Mandeb Strait is not closed, saying the blockade only targets Saudi ships
- EU naval mission ASPIDES raises risk level for merchant ships in Red Sea due to Houthi actions
- This comes as the US and Iran vie for control over the Strait of Hormuz, another key regional passageway for energy exports
- Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu vows to 'act with full force' after fatal West Bank clashes
- US conducts strikes on Iran for 13th consecutive night; Iran says IRGC base in northern Iran was attacked
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
We are ending our coverage
Thank you for reading. Join us for more daily coverage of the US-Iran war and developments from the region in our blog on Saturday.
US forces 'disable' vessel which attempted to breach blockade of Iranian ports
US forces have "disabled" a merchant vessel that attempted to circumvent the US blockade on Iranian ports, military sources told the Associated Press news agency.
US Central Command spokesperson Tim Hawkins told AP that the M/T Lavine was "disabled" in the Gulf of Oman on Friday, after the vessel had reportedly attempted to circumvent the US blockade four times.
Hawkins claimed the ship did not comply with US commands after it was warned. Hawkins said US forces then fired into the ship's engine room.
It's the second commercial vessel attacked by the US since the military reimposed its blockade on Iranian ports on July 14. It follows the collapse of a ceasefire between the US and Iran on July 8.
US President Donald Trump first imposed a blockade on Iran's ports in April, before it was paused during the ceasefire following the US-Iran Memorandum of Understanding in June.
Bahrain activates alarm sirens amid reports that US naval facility targeted by Iran
The Bahraini Interior Ministry said sirens were being sounded late Friday night.
"Citizens and residents are urged to remain calm and head to the nearest safe place," the ministry posted on X.
Bahrain is home to a US military base known as Naval Support Activity Bahrain. Bahrain has frequently been targeted in Iranian attacks since the outbreak of the US-Iran war on February 28.
Reports on X suggested there were explosions near the base, and that it might have been hit by an Iranian missile. The US military has not commented on the incident.
Saudi-led coalition confirms attacks on Hodeida, but said it did not hit city's port
The Saudi-led coalition confirmed attacks on Hodeida in comments carried by Saudi broadcaster Al-Arabiya.
The coalition, however, said it did not strike the city's port and had only targeted "military" sites.
"All ports in the governorate remain open to shipping," the statement said. "The coalition adds that the destroyed targets were linked to threats against commercial shipping in the Red Sea."
Saudi attacks Houthi-held Hodeida, rebel-aligned media says
Saudi Arabia has attacked Hodeida, according to media aligned with the Houthi rebel movement in Yemen.
The Houthis control the port city.
"A Saudi aggression comprising a series of airstrikes hit facilities belonging to the telecommunications authority," the Houthi-aligned Al-Masirah TV channel reported. Al-Masirah operates from southern Beirut.
In addition, the Saudis reportedly struck Kamaran Island in the Red Sea, which the Houthis also control.
The attacks come after the Houthis claimed responsibility for strikes on several Saudi oil tankers in the Red Sea in recent days. The Houthis say they are blockading Saudi vessels in the Red Sea.
Saudi's official SPA news agency reported that a Saudi vessel was again targeted on Friday, and there is "minor damage to the vessel's hull" as a result.
Trump claims that Iranians are getting 'very serious' in discussions with US
Taking questions from journalists in the Oval Office, US President Donald Trump claimed that Iran is getting "very serious" in its discussions with the US.
Trump was asked about reports that the US could soon launch a large-scale attack on Iran, the biggest of the war so far.
"No, I haven't," Trump replied when asked by journalists if he had decided to launch the operation.
"Look, we're talking to them right now. I think they're getting more and more serious as the days go by," Trump said.
Iranian officials have not commented on whether talks are underway with the US. A ceasefire deal between the US and Iran fell apart on July 8.
Trump has repeatedly claimed Iran has been close to agreeing terms with the US since the start of the war in late February.
WATCH - US strikes Iran for 13th straight night
US Central Command has said the attacks targeted military capabilities threatening commercial shipping, while Iran has claimed Washington has deployed advanced weapons against the country.
The UN warned the conflict could spiral out of control, as both sides adopt increasingly confrontational rhetoric and the risk of wider regional escalation grows.
Trump says China, Russia not selling weapons to Iran
In a post on Truth Social, US President Donald Trump claimed the leaders of China and Russia told him their countries are not selling weapons to Iran and that he believes them.
"President Xi, at our recent meeting in Beijing, China, told me that he would not, under any circumstances, give or sell Weapons to the Islamic Republic of Iran - And that statement included Chinese Companies," Trump said. "I take him at his word, and, besides, I am doing him very big favors, also.
"Likewise, President Putin, despite the the horrible war going on in Ukraine (The relationship remains, as it does with President Zelenskyy), told me he would not sell Weapons to Iran," Trump said.
Trump said China and Russia are not participating in the Iran war, and "if they did, it would be very bad for them - Certainly not in their best interests."
Reuters news agency reported this week that US intelligence officials are probing whether Russia is helping Iran target CIA facilities in the Middle East.
CNN reported in April that US intelligence indicated that China is preparing weapons shipments to Iran amid a ceasefire. China has denied shipping weapons to Iran amid the war.
Houthis on Saudi maritime blockade: 'There is no closure of Bab al-Mandeb'
Yemen's Houthi rebel group has denied that it is completely closing the Bab al-Mandeb Strait.
"There is no closure of Bab al-Mandeb as some are suggesting," Houthi spokesperson Mohammed Abdusalam posted on X. He said the group is just engaged in a "naval blockade targeting only the Saudi side."
The Houthis have alleged that Saudi Arabia is sieging Yemeni areas that the group controls, and in turn have begun their "naval blockade" of Saudi vessels.
The Houthis are an Iran-backed group and designated as a terrorist organization by the US, Canada and several other countries. They control large swathes of western and northern Yemen, including the capital Sanaa and the coastline along the Red Sea.
The Bab al-Mandeb Strait links the Red Sea to the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean. It is a particularly important passageway for Saudi Arabia to export its crude oil.
Insecurity in the Strait of Hormuz has caused Saudi Arabia to shift its oil exports to the western port city of Yanbu, where the crude is then shipped via the Bab al-Mandeb Strait.
Crude prices in recent days have temporarily spiked above $100 (almost €88) for the first time since May due to the crises both in the Strait of Hormuz and Bab al-Mandeb.
The Houthis have claimed attacks on Saudi oil tankers in the Red Sea in recent days.
The EU naval operation ASPIDES has raised its threat level in the Bab al-Mandeb Strait for merchant ships, and said the risk of escalation remains high.
UN urges repatriation of 6,000 sailors stranded in Strait of Hormuz
The United Nations has called on countries involved in the Middle East war to help repatriate around 6,000 sailors who remain stranded on ships in the Strait of Hormuz.
UN rights chief Volker Türk called on states to urgently provide consular assistance to stranded seafarers, deliver essential supplies, and "facilitate safe passage for stranded seafarers to safely evacuate and disembark."
"Attacks against civilian vessels are unacceptable and must stop. They are protected under international humanitarian law," Türk's spokesperson told reporters. "Seafarers remain exposed to hostilities as deadly attacks in the strait continue - facing imminent risks of death or harm."
The UN rights office said 17 ship crew members had been reported killed since the conflict erupted in late February.
It said at least 93 other sailors, across nine ships, had been abandoned at sea by their ship owners.
"Thee seafarers have been left on their ships to fend for themselves without food, water, fuel, medical care, electricity or means to communicate with their families," Türk's spokesperson said.
Netanyahu vows to 'act with full force' after fatal West Bank clashes
The Israeli military killed four Palestinians near an Israeli settlement in the occupied West Bank on Friday, while two Israelis were also killed in the clashes.
Israeli media reports and local Palestinian officials suggested that a group of Israeli settlers, some of whom were armed, entered the Palestinian village of Tell, southwest of Nablus, on Friday morning. The settlers were met by residents of the Palestinian village who were fearful of an attack.
Footage of the incident that was confirmed by the Israeli military and shared online by the military correspondent for Israel's Army Radio showed two armed men in civilian clothing, as well as at least one Israeli soldier, pointing their weapons at a group of Palestinians who had gathered in a field.
"Villagers came out to defend their homes and property. Clashes and physical altercations broke out between the residents and the settlers," the head of the village council in Tell, Walid Zidan, told the AFP news agency.
"Israeli soldiers were present and together with the settlers began opening fire ... it was the settlers who stormed the village, with the intention of killing, vandalizing and setting property on fire."
The Israeli military said it has received reports that Israeli civilians were hiking in the area and had been attacked by Palestinians.
In response to the incident, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu vowed to "act with full force against the terrorists and those who orchestrate and sponsor them."
The Israeli military subsequently set up roadblocks near Tell and Nablus and announced a widespread operation in the occupied West Bank.
"Following the terror attack earlier today in the area of Tell, IDF soldiers are preparing for extensive counterterrorism operational activity in the sector," the military said.
Blasts heard near Irbil airport in Iraqi Kurdistan
Blasts were heard near Irbil's airport in Iraqi Kurdistan on Friday, news agencies reported citing their journalists on the ground.
The Associated Press said its journalist heard at least seven blasts around 9:30 a.m. (0630 GMT) and observed at least four plumes of black smoke from areas near or inside a military base at the city's airport. The base hosts US forces in northern Iraq.
An AFP journalist observed drones hovering over the city, with air defenses activated.
According to the Reuters news agency, a drone crashed near Irbil International Airport, prompting a temporary flight suspension.
Irbil is the capital of Iraq's semi-autonomous Kurdish region.
US attacked IRGC base in north: state media
Iran said that the US military hit a Revolutionary Guards' (IRGC) base in the northern province of Gilan, according to the state media.
"This morning, an IRGC naval forces headquarters in Zibakenar was targeted by American enemy projectiles, which damaged some of the equipment in the complex," said Ali Bagheri, deputy governor for the province, quoted by the official IRNA news agency.
He added, "Based on initial investigations, no reports of human casualties have been received so far, and the various aspects of this incident are being investigated by the relevant authorities."
Iran's FM Abbas Araghchi warns countries assisting US attacks
Speaking at the Shanghai Cooperation Organization summit in Kyrgyzstan, Iran's Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi said Tehran would hold accountable any country assisting the US in an attack on the Islamic republic.
"Any participation, cooperation or assistance in committing aggression against Iran will create international responsibility for the relevant parties," Araghchi said, adding that Iran "reserves its right to take all necessary measures within the framework of self-defense."
He said the source of any aggression against Iran would be considered as a legitimate target of Iran's defense forces.
US strikes on southwest kill at least four people, says Iran
The overnight US attack on the province of Khuzestan in southwestern Iran killed at least four people and injured several others, Iran's official IRNA news agency reported.
Khuzestan deputy Governor Valiollah Hayati said that the US missile attack hit areas around provincial capital Ahvaz.
"Four of our compatriots were martyred and five others were injured," IRNA cited Hayati as saying.