What you need to know
This blog has now closed. Read below for some of the top headlines from India on Friday, August 14:
- Seven workers have died in Uttarakhand after a landslide sent water and debris gushing into an under-construction tunnel.
- Rescuers are trying to reach three workers still trapped inside.
- Uttarakhand Chief Minister Pushkar Singh Dhami visited the site on Friday.
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Football: Tata Steel sells Jamshedpur FC for $1
Tata Steel on Friday sold its entire stake in the top-flight football club Jamshedpur FC to Churchill Brothers, a Goa-based club, for a nominal 100 Indian rupees (€0.91, $1.05).
It comes two weeks after Tata Steel, one India's biggest conglomerates, announced it was bowing out of the Indian Super League.
Jamshedpur FC players and fans had earlier appealed to Tata Steel to rethink closing down the club.
Churchill Brothers are set to take over the contracts of all Jamshedpur FC players and coaching staff with effect from September 2026, a statement from Tata Steel said.
"We are glad that this agreement gives our players and coaches the opportunity to continue playing club football," DB Sundara Ramam, Tata Steel's vice president of corporate services, said in the statement.
Cricket: India to play 600th Test match on Independence Day
India captain Shubman Gill said it was a "huge honour" to lead the Indian men's cricket team for the country's landmark 600th Test match as they play against Sri Lanka on Saturday in the opening match of a two-Test series.
The match coincides with the anniversary of India's independence from British colonial rule an August 15, 1947,
"It's a big honour and privilege for me to captain India in any Test match," Gill told the media in Sri Lanka's Galle.
"Captaining India in our 600th Test is a huge honour and doing it on India's Independence Day makes it even more special."
India played its first Test format of the sport in 1932 against England at the Lord's Cricket Ground in London.
Only two nations - England with 1,097 matches and Australia with 883 - have played more Tests than India.
India electronics company investigates supply chain after child labor uncovered at supplier - report
Indian home appliances firm Eureka Forbes said it has begun an internal probe into its supply chain after authorities found child labour at one of its suppliers in New Delhi, the Reuters news agency reported on Friday.
According to Reuters, this week the country's National Human Rights Commission asked Eureka Forbes, along with electrical equipment maker Havells and Unilever's India unit to carry out a check of their supply chains.
Four children - aged between 14 and 16 - were rescued by Delhi authorities from a small electrical wiring and component company called YY Harness on Monday, Reuters reported.
"We take these allegations extremely seriously...we have initiated an immediate review and audit of the practices," Eureka Forbes Chief Financial Officer Gaurav Khandelwal told Reuters.
Hindustan Unilever denied having the small-scale vendor as a business Partner, Reuters said in its report.
WATCH - Why insurance could help India's poorest beat the heat
As Delhi's heatwaves intensify, some workers are using a heatwave insurance that pays out in extreme heat
In the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu, a lone man's mission to grow a forest along the Thamarabarani River helped stop sand mining, protect water resources and safeguard his village.
Find out more in the latest edition of Eco India:
India dispatches first tranche of relief supplies to quake-hit Colombia
India on Friday sent a first batch of a 20 metric-ton consignment of relief supplies for earthquake that struck Colombia, Indian foreign minister S Jaishankar said in a post on X.
"The assistance includes medicines & medical equipment, temporary shelter & hygiene support, and other essential items needed in the aftermath of the disaster," he said.
A magnitude 7.4 earthquake rattled Colombia on Monday in what was the Latin American nation's strongest quake in decades.
As per official figures, the disaster has left 265 dead, hundreds missing, and tens of thousands displaced across western Colombia.
Delhi: High Court, airport and some government offices receive hoax bomb threats
Delhi's High Court says it has received a bomb threat by email, prompting a bomb disposal squad and sniffer dogs to screen the court premises, Indian media reported.
Delhi High Court Bar Association (DHCBA) Joint Secretary Kunal Malhotra told news agency ANI that the threat appeared to be fake and the situation was under control.
The email threat mentioned a blast at the court at 2:11 p.m., news agency PTI cited its court sources as saying.
According to ANI, the Delhi Fire Service received calls of bomb threats in at least five additional locations including, Terminal 3 of the Indira Gandhi International Airport and other government complexes.
Authorities declared all threats to be hoaxes.
The bomb scare comes as security remains beefed up in the Indian capital ahead of Independence Day celebrations on Saturday.
Air India Phuket-Delhi plane lost flight controls for four seconds, says Airbus probe
An Air India Airbus A320 that suddenly lost altitude on August 4 recorded losses in all three hydraulic systems, briefly losing crucial flight controls, media reports on Friday cited an initial Airbus analysis as saying.
Air India flight AI2379 from Thailand's Phuket to New Delhi had dropped 300 feet during cruise over the Indian state of Odisha, before recovering and landing safely in Delhi.
Twenty passengers and four crew members were injured during the incident which was classified as "serious" by Indian aviation authorities.
India's Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau is probing the incident with technical assistance from Airbus and France's BEA.
What do the Airbus findings say?
Airbus shared the technical evaluation after decoding the flight data recorder in a communication to Air India in response to the Indian flag carrier's request for an assessment .
The plane's elevators and ailerons, which control its pitch and roll, were unavailable for about four seconds, during which the aircraft pitched upward, Reuters cited Airbus as saying in its preliminary findings.
The first officer applied a full nose-down input during the timeframe but there was "no direct response" from the flight-control surfaces, Reuters cited the assessment as saying, adding that the hydraulic systems recovered within seconds.
The initial analysis has not established a root cause and Airbus has asked Air India to conduct checks on the aircraft's systems and sensors and to provide more information about the incident.
Airbus has also asked Air India to share the recent maintenance history of hydraulic systems along with more detailed accounts from the pilots.
There was no statement from the planemaker and Air India on the assessment.
Earlier this week, Indian media reports said that the primary captain of the flight tested positive for marijuana in a confirmatory drug test.
On Thursday, an internal communication from Air India showed that the carrier would now conduct a mandatory dope test for all its pilots, expanding checks beyond regulatory requirements.
Under the current rules, airlines in India randomly test at least 10 percent of their flight crew for psychoactive substances each year.
Seven killed in Uttarakhand tunnel mishap, three missing
At least seven workers have died in a tunnel collapse in the northern Indian hill state of Uttarakhand, officials said on Friday, adding that a search was underway for three missing people.
The incident occurred overnight when a landslide sent water and debris streaming into an under-construction tunnel belonging to Tehri Hydro Development Corporation Limited (THDC) in Pipalkoti, in Chamoli district.
According to officials, 22 workers were inside the tunnel at the time of the disaster.
The injured are undergoing treatment.
A multi-agency effort is underway to reach the three workers still trapped inside the tunnel, with teams from the National and State Disaster Response Forces, the Indo-Tibetan Border Police and fire services at the site.
Rescuers are battling rising water and debris during the search, as the state has seen heavy rainfall in recent days.
Visuals circulated by local authorities show rescue teams wearing head-mounted torches and using makeshift rafts to reach the flooded section of the tunnel.
Uttarakhand Chief Minister Pushkar Singh Dhami visited the collapse site on Friday morning and reviewed the rescue operations.
"Evacuating every worker safely is our topmost priority," Dhami said in a statement.
In 2023, a tunnel collapse in Uttarakhand left 41 workers trapped for 17 days before they were rescued.
Welcome to our coverage
This is Dharvi Vaid Dhulia from DW's studio in New Delhi, bringing you our daily news capsule with the biggest developments making headlines in India.
A tunnel accident in the northern state of Uttarakhand has left at least seven workers dead. A frantic search is underway for three missing workers as heavy monsoon rains batter the region.
In other news, the woes of the country's flag carrier, Air India, appear to be mounting. An Airbus A320 flying from Phuket to Delhi suddenly lost altitude earlier this month. The pilot in command later tested positive for marijuana. A preliminary analysis by Airbus has now found that the aircraft lost key flight controls for about four seconds.
India is gearing up to celebrate its 80th Independence Day tomorrow. A full-dress rehearsal for the Independence Day parade, held at the historic Red Fort in the Indian capital, has concluded.
Stay tuned as we bring you more.