US federal authorities arrested social media influencer brothers Andrew and Tristan Tate.
Brady McCarron, a spokesperson for the Marshals Service, told The Associated Press, which first reported on the arrest, that the warrant was sealed.
Prosecutors in the UK said they sought the brothers' extradition on charges of rape and sex trafficking.
"We have decided to prosecute Andrew and Tristan Tate for further offences including rape, arranging or facilitating trafficking for sexual exploitation and offences relating to indecent images of a child," said Malcolm McHaffie, Head of the Special Crime Division at the Crown Prosecution Service.
The offenses are alleged to have happened between July 2010 and August 2017, according to the CPS statement.
What are the charges against the Tate brothers?
The CPS is bringing the following charges:
- Andrew Tate, 39, with seven further counts of rape, three counts of arranging or facilitating trafficking for sexual exploitation, three counts of assault occasioning actual bodily harm and 19 additional charges for offences relating to indecent images of a child and extreme pornography
- Tristan Tate, 38, with one count of sexual assault, two counts of rape and three counts of arranging or facilitating trafficking for sexual exploitation
Joseph McBride, an attorney representing the Tate brothers, called the new charges "filth and slander" aimed at derailing defamation lawsuits filed by the brothers in the United States.
"We are confident that once a competent judge sees the facts, and once the Department of Justice confronts this egregious abuse of its own authority, Andrew and Tristan Tate will walk free. America does not do Britain's political dirty work," McBride said in a statement posted on X.
What to know about Andrew Tate and his brother
Andrew Tate first reached a mainstream audience after appearing on the UK reality show Big Brother in 2016, but he was removed when a video surfaced that appeared to show him assaulting a woman.
The Tate brothers, dual US and British citizens who moved to Romania , were arrested there in 2022.
They were accused of human trafficking and forming a criminal gang to sexually exploit women - allegations they denied. The case didn't go forward after a Romanian court found legal and procedural irregularities on the part of the prosecutors.
Andrew and Tristan Tate, both former kickboxers, are often associated with the "manosphere," a male-centered social media movement rooted in anti-feminist discourse.
Edited by: Sean Sinico
Don't let the algorithm hide the news. If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google by clicking here and hitting the "star" or "preferred" button, so you'll always see our verified news first.