What you need to know
These updates have been closed. Thank you for joining us.
Here's a roundup of the biggest headlines from India on Tuesday, August 11:
- Cockroach Janta Party's Abhijeet Dipke backed Jharkhand student leader Devendra Nath Mahto
- Mahto, who is on hunger strike, said his health deteriorated after police used batons to disperse protesters
- Dipke called Monday's police action 'cruel and inhuman'
- IPL cricketer Abishek Porel arrested on rape charges
- Tamil Nadu calls to scrap NEET exam
- NASA invites Indian space agency ISRO to join Moon Base program
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Thank you for reading
That's all for today!
We'll be back with more updates tomorrow.
Cheers!
IPL cricketer Abishek Porel arrested on rape charges
Indian Premier League (IPL) cricketer Abishek Porel was arrested by police in the eastern West Bengal state on Tuesday in connection with a rape case filed by a medical student, media reports said.
The 23-year-old Delhi Capitals wicketkeeper-batter was arrested in Hooghly after questioning and appeared before a court following a medical examination.
The woman has alleged that Porel established a physical relationship with her on the promise of marriage and later threatened to make private photographs public.
In her complaint, she also alleged that Porel assaulted and confined her in April.
The arrest follows a Calcutta High Court order issued last month directing the police to apprehend Porel and another accused and seize electronic devices linked to the case.
Dipke backs Jharkhand student leader Mahto
Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) founder Abhijeet Dipke on Tuesday backed student protesters in Jharkhand and leader Devendra Nath Mahto, calling him "the voice and inspiration of Jharkhand's youth."
In a post on X, Dipke said the CJP stands "firmly" by Mahto's side.
Mahto was hospitalized after joining a march to the state Assembly in Ranchi on Monday while on a nine-day hunger strike over alleged irregularities in government recruitment exams.
Police used tear gas, batons and water cannons to disperse the protesters. Mahto said his health deteriorated after police used batons against the demonstrators.
NASA invites Indian space agency ISRO to join Moon Base program
The United States' National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has invited India's space agency to join its planned Moon Base program, reports said on Tuesday.
Posting on X, the US Embassy in India account called NASA's program "humanity's first outpost on the Moon."
"The base will drive lunar scientific breakthroughs and prepare for crewed missions to Mars," the embassy posted, adding that more information will be coming soon.
According to the reports, the call for collaboration with Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) comes as the two countries seek to deepen cooperation under the Artemis Accords.
The two sides have also agreed to advance talks on sharing open scientific data under the accords, which aim to promote cooperation in the civil exploration and use of space.
India signed the Artemis Accords in 2023.
Airbus sending experts to assist probe into Air India flight's losing altitude
Airbus is sending a team of experts to New Delhi to assist India's investigation into an Air India flight that lost about 300 feet (100 meters) in altitude during a Phuket-New Delhi flight last week, injuring 12 people.
The Airbus A320, carrying 137 passengers and eight crew members, stabilized and landed safely after the sudden altitude loss.
India's Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau has classified the incident as serious.
"A team of specialists is being dispatched to assist with the investigation," an Airbus spokesperson said on Monday. "Airbus is providing technical assistance to the relevant investigating authorities. We are actively supporting the airline and will provide further information as it becomes available."
The probe comes as authorities await confirmatory results of a psychoactive substance test for the flight's captain. Both pilots have been removed from the flying roster pending the investigation.
Eight passengers and four cabin crew members were admitted to hospitals after landing in the Indian capital.
ANALYSIS: Anger over exam irregularities spreads to Jharkhand
Inspired by the Cockroach movement, young people in India's eastern state of Jharkhand are marching on the state assembly to demand transparency and a probe into reported irregularities in civil service recruitment exams.
IN DEPTH: Perspectives on AI, ethics and digital inclusion from Kenya, India and Mexico
In June 2026, DW hosted researchers from Kenya, India and Mexico. During their visit, Prof. Levi Obonyo, Prof. Carlos Vidales and Ms. Neeti Vaid interacted with students, faculty, DW news editors and MDEV managers.
Tamil Nadu calls to scrap nationwide medical college entrance examination
Tamil Nadu's state legislature on Tuesday passed a resolution urging the central government to scrap the nationwide medical college entrance examination, media reports said.
Health Minister KG Arunraj said the National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (NEET) exam undermined social justice and disadvantaged rural and poorer students by increasing reliance on costly coaching centers, according to the reports.
The Tamil Nadu government instead proposed admissions for medical colleges based on students' grades in Class 12.
The motion was supported by all parties, with the lone lawmaker from Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) walking out during the proceedings, reports said.
The NEET exam has been in the news in India since the Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) launched a protest following the cancellation of the test in May, after authorities found its question paper was leaked.
The cancellation of the highly competitive NEET exam sparked outrage across the country.
The CJP protests, which started in New Delhi and then spread across the country, forced the resignation of Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan last month.
US court dismisses bribery and fraud charges against billionaire Adani
A US judge dismissed bribery and fraud charges against Indian billionaire Gautam Adani on Monday after the Trump administration moved to drop the case.
Adani, a close ally of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi's, was charged in 2024 with participating in a $265 million (€230 million) scheme to bribe Indian officials to secure solar energy contracts.
His associates were also charged with attempting to obstruct the US investigations by destroying evidence. Adani has denied wrongdoing.
Brooklyn federal judge Nicholas Garaufis criticized the US Justice Department's handling of the decision said the decision to dismiss the 2024 charges was unusual and raised concerns because prosecutors and investigators, including FBI and SEC agents involved in the case, were not consulted.
According to media reports Adani's attorney Robert Giuffra, who is also Donald Trump's personal lawyer, told Justice Department officials in April that if charges were dropped, the billionaire would invest $10 billion in the United States.
Garaufis said he believed that Adani's reported pledge to invest in the US did not influence the Justice Department's decision to drop the case.
In May, court documents showed that Gautam Adani agreed to pay civil penalties of $6 million, while his nephew Sagar Adani, another leader at Adani Green Energy, agreed to pay $12 million in a settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The proposed settlement doesn't include an admission of guilt.
Adani welcomed the ruling, saying his faith in "truth, fairness and the rule of law" remained unwavering.
Jharkhand student leader Mahto hospitalized after police use force
Student protest leader Devendra Nath Mahto was admitted to a hospital in the eastern state of Jharkhand after taking part in a march to the state legislature on Monday while on a nine-day hunger strike.
Police used tear gas, batons and water cannons to disperse the crowd of students marching toward the state assembly on Monday in state capital Ranchi.
The students are alleging irregularities in government recruitment exams.
Mahto said his health deteriorated after police used batons to disperse protesters outside the Legislative Assembly.
"At present, my treatment continues under the supervision of doctors," he wrote on X.
Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) founder Abhijeet Dipke also alleged that Mahto was injured by police batons and was experiencing chest pain.
"Be it Jantar Mantar or Jharkhand, such police brutality against students is cruel and inhuman," Dipke wrote on X, alluding to the last month's student protests that forced India's education minister to resign.
Meanwhile, the Jharkhand unit of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) accused the Hemant Soren-led government of using excessive force, alleging hundreds of students were injured, and called a statewide shutdown on Tuesday.
Earlier on Sunday, the sixth round of talks between student protesters and the government failed to reach a breakthrough following which the protesters announced a march to the state Assembly.
Welcome to our coverage
Hello! This is Shakeel from DW's New Delhi Studio bringing you the latest updates from across India.
The student protests in Jharkhand are showing no signs of abating as leader Devendra Nath Mahto was admitted to a hospital after participating in a march to the state legislature while on a nine-day hunger strike. On Monday, police used tear gas, batons and water cannon to disperse thousands of youth protesters.
Meanwhile, a US court on Monday dismissed a case against Indian billionaire Gautam Adani, a close ally of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, after the Trump administration decided to drop fraud and bribery allegations against him.
For all this and more, stay tuned to our blog.