The Trump administration on Friday asked the US Supreme Court to allow construction to continue on the president's $400 million White House ballroom.
It comes a week after an appeals court ruled Donald Trump's ballroom project, planned for the site of the White House's East Wing after it was demolished, lacked congressional approval and ordered above-ground construction to stop.
"This case involves an extraordinary and unlawful injunction that will halt the ongoing construction of the integrated military complex, including a totally secure ballroom space, at the East Wing of the White House, which is vitally required by national security," Trump's Solicitor General D. John Sauer wrote in a petition to the Supreme Court.
Chief Justice John Roberts set a deadline of Tuesday for a response by plaintiffs challenging the ballroom project.
Trump assassination attempts and flight from Turkey mentioned
The nonprofit National Trust for Historic Preservation first brought the case after the East Wing was torn down and work began on a 90,000-square-foot (8,360-square-meter) ballroom.
In a 2-1 ruling on August 7, the DC Circuit upheld a lower-court judge's order directing the administration to halt above-ground construction.
"Whether or not a massive ballroom should be constructed is for Congress to decide and is not a matter for Executive self-help," the appeals court panel wrote.
To justify the need for a secure ballroom, Justice Department lawyers pointed to the July 8 missile threat against Air Force One when Trump was flown out of Turkey aboard a secret flight and other recent assassination attempts.
The filing also claims the project is on time and under budget, funded by about $400 million in private donations. Democrats, however, say Trump's tax law is helping pay for the ballroom, while lawmakers in Congress have not approved a request by the administration for additional funding.
Responding to the petition, the trust accused the White House of trying to "outrun the courts" by accelerating construction. It cited plans to install 1 million pounds (453,592.37 kilograms) of rebarand pour 3,000 cubic yards (81,000 cubic feet, 2,293.66 cubic meters) of concrete over the next week.
"The Administration's transparent efforts to evade the rule of law, frustrate judicial review, and limit the availability of meaningful relief in the courts must stop here," the plaintiffs said.
The National Trust has urged the Supreme Court to reject the administration's appeal.
Edited by: Karl Sexton
Don't let the algorithm hide the news. If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google, so you'll always see our verified news first.