Jason Arday, the former University of Cambridge professor who resigned amid allegations of plagiarism, was found dead on Friday.
Without naming him directly, the Metropolitan Police said he was found "unresponsive" in Battersea, south London, and pronounced dead at the scene.
"At this time his death is being treated as unexpected, but is not believed to be suspicious," a spokesperson said. "His next-of-kin have been informed and are being supported by officers."
Arday, a professor of sociology of education at Cambridge, one of the world's top universities, resigned just over a week ago amid mounting allegations that he plagiarized parts of his PhD thesis and overstated his personal achievements.
He had denied wrongdoing, saying in a resignation letter last week that he did not accept "the narratives that have surrounded me."
Questions mounted over thesis and fundraising claims
British newspapers and commentators have seized on the allegations, arguing that he gained an unfair advantage through diversity, equality and inclusion (DEI) policies.
Scrutiny of Arday's credentials intensified last month after criticism from former Cambridge researcher Nathan Cofnas.
The Times of London later reported similarities between passages in Arday's 2015 PhD thesis and an earlier paper by another researcher.
Cambridge initially stood by Arday, saying that the plagiarism allegations had been investigated and cleared by Liverpool John Moores University, which awarded Arday's doctorate.
But last week, Cambridge launched an investigation following "new information about Professor Arday's qualifications and honorary appointments."
British media also questioned Arday's claims of having raised £5.5 million (€6.4 million, $7.4 million) for charity through endurance challenges. Arday told The Guardian the funds were raised collectively over two decades.
Supporters reject claims, cite racial bias
Supporters, including over two dozen academics and politicians, characterized the plagiarism allegations as a "smear campaign" designed to discredit Arday and other Black people in influential positions.
In his resignation letter, Arday said that "the relentless accusations, speculation and public commentary have taken a profound toll on me and on those I love."
His family issued a statement denouncing the "campaign of sustained abuse" Arday had faced since he took the role at Cambridge University more than three years ago.
"The campaign of misinformation was too much for Jason, who was a gentle man and who always wanted to see the best in everyone," Arday's family said.
"We won't comment further at this point beyond asking the press to leave us alone now, and to stop the campaign of harassment which has been waged against Jason and his family for too long," the statement added.
Cambridge's Vice-Chancellor Professor Deborah Prentice said, "We are desperately saddened to hear this tragic news. Our heartfelt sympathies go to Jason Arday's family and friends at this incredibly difficult time."
Edited by: Rob Turner and Karl Sexton
Don't let the algorithm hide the news. If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google, so you'll always see our verified news first.