Hurricane Lala passed over Hawaii's Big Island on Saturday without making landfall and began moving away on Sunday as a tropical storm, while still bringing strong winds and heavy rain to the region.
The hurricane had earlier strengthened to Category 1 as its eye approached the southern part of Big Island.
It was expected be the Big Island's first possible direct hit from a hurricane in 155 years but that was not to be as the storm passed the island's southern tip.
What is the situation after Lala passed by?
Tropical storm conditions, with drenching rain and winds, have continued to spread toward the west on Sunday, from Maui to Oahu and then Kauai.
The National Hurricane Center warned that wind speeds on top of mountains and on the windward and leeward slopes could be up to 30% stronger than the winds near the surface that are used to calculate a storm's official strength.
Governor Josh Green said at least one person died in a car accident in the Big Island's South Point area and a number of roofs were blown off.
"There have been a lot of roads impacted, our crews have already been out to more than 30 sites," Green said.
Experts warn of flooding, mudslides
Earlier, Lala had maximum sustained winds of 75 miles per hour (120 kilometers per hour), with its center forecast to move over or near the southern end of the Big Island.
The National Hurricane Center warned the island could receive 10 to 20 inches (25 to 50 cm) of rain, with up to 25 inches possible in some areas.
"This rainfall will produce life-threatening flooding and mudslides, especially in areas of steep terrain," the US National Hurricane Center said.
The Big Island, also known as the island of Hawaii, is the archipelago's largest island by landmass - and with some 200,000 inhabitants, the second-most populous.
Hawaii declares state of emergency
More than 60,000 utility customers across Hawaii were without power, including over 31,000 on the Big Island, according to outage data.
The tropical storm warning covering Oahu - home to the state capital, Honolulu, and around 70% of the state's inhabitants- as well as the other major islands of Maui, Molokai, Lanai, Kahoolawe, Kauai and Niihau is still in place.
A storm surge of one to three feet was expected to be accompanied by "large and dangerous waves," according to officials.
Governor Green had declared a state of emergency and urged residents to shelter in place. "It's a serious storm," Green said.
Authorities also announced the closure of Hilo International Airport, adding that Ellison Onizuka Kona International Airport would also be shut down.
Risk of wildfires rise
Authorities opened shelters and advised residents to clear drains and gutters, move valuables off the ground and prepare for possible extended power outages.
Vanessa Almanza, a National Weather Service meteorologist in Honolulu, said dry and breezy conditions outside the storm would raise risk of wildfires.
In 2023, the Maui town of Lahaina burned during extreme winds as a hurricane passed far to the south.
Meteorologists said Lala's arrival coincides with a powerful El Nino event, which can increase hurricane activity in the Pacific.
Hawaii has not experienced a major hurricane landfall since Hurricane Iniki struck Kauai in 1992, causing six deaths and billions of dollars in damage.
Edited by: Saim Dušan Inayatullah
Don't let the algorithm hide the news. If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google by clicking here and hitting the "star" or "preferred" button, so you'll always see our verified news first.