Sweeping travel restrictions on Chinese citizens came into effect on Tuesday, including exit bans for people considered to have endangered China's "industrial or technological security."
The new exit-and-entry rules, which were passed in July, apply to citizens deemed to have violated technology import and export regulations, particularly in the field of artificial intelligence.
The State Council in Beijing said the new rules were formulated to "safeguard national sovereignty, security, and development interests."
The regulations apply not only to people within China but also to Chinese citizens deemed to have committed criminal acts abroad.
In such cases, citizens could be "prohibited from leaving the country for a period of six months to three years from the date of their return to China," said the State Council.
Travel bans give Beijing 'wide remit'
The restrictions come as China remains locked in a technological arms race with the United States, with both countries accusing each other of stealing locally developed AI models in recent months.
And analysts warn that the full scope of the new rules will only become clear once they start being implemented.
Security and criminal activities "can be vaguely defined and easily adjusted," said Chong Ja Ian, an analyst from the National University of Singapore, telling the AFP news agency that Beijing has given itself a "wide remit."
Will China's new travel bans affect foreigners?
Under the new regulations, foreign nationals could also be denied entry to China for up to five years if found to have made false statements in visa applications.
Foreign governments have often reported instances of citizens being denied permission to leave China due to security-related investigations.
Analyst Chong highlighted the recent case of US citizen Min Zin who the US government said was detained improperly in Yunnan province in June.
"The case of Min Zin is a reminder that the range of people [that Beijing] could restrict from exiting could be quite wide - and potentially arbitrary," he said.
Chinese travel bans: Taiwan warns citizens
The new rules could have particular implications for Taiwanese nationals who work in the tech sector and who travel between Taiwan and China.
Authorities in Taipei have warned citizens to take extra care on visits to China, which considers people from Taiwan to be Chinese citizens.
Beijing has dismissed any such concerns, claiming the rules provide better legal protection for Taiwanese.
Dylan Loh, an associate professor at Singapore's Nanyang Technological University, told AFP the travel restrictions "send a message" that China will take action to prevent "leaks in security or national interest-sensitive areas."
Edited by: Natalie Muller
If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google by clicking here and hitting the "star" or "preferred" button, so you'll always see our verified news first.