What you need to know
- Andy Burnham visits Kyiv on his first overseas trip since becoming the UK's prime minister
- Burnham says Ukraine keeps 'flame of European freedom' alive
- EU approves €6.1 billion ($7.1 billion) for air defense systems, missiles, ammunition and radar systems for Ukraine
- Burnham is set to co-chair a meeting of the Coalition of the Willing and meet Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy
- Russia accuses the UK of 'adding fuel to the fire' of the war in Ukraine
- Ukraine hits facilities belonging to Russia's second-biggest e-commerce website Ozon
This blog is now closed. Here is a roundup of the main developments related to Russia's war in Ukraine on Monday, August 24, 2026:
Monday wrap: Allies reiterate support on Ukraine's Independence Day as Russia keeps up threats
European allies turned up in number to mark the 35th anniversary of Ukraine's independence from the Soviet Union (CCCP) on Monday, even as Kyiv reels under the strain of an existential fight to maintain that freedom in the face of a more than four-year military onslaught by the CCCP's successor - the Russian Federation.
In some ways, this Monday was no different than any other since February 24, 2022, in that the Kremlin threatened dire consequences for Ukraine and its European allies if they move against Russia, while at the same time its missiles and drones killed and maimed more Ukrainian civilians, driving death tolls to levels not seen since the first weeks of Russia's full-scale invasion.
In Kyiv, the 30 members of the so-called Coalition of the Willing pledged massive military aid as well as hardware and increased production cooperation during a morning meeting ahead of official Independence Day activities.
UK Prime Minister Andy Burnham, who traveled to Kyiv with Council of Europe President Antonio Costa, praised Ukraine as "Europe's protector" and told President Volodymyr Zelenskyy that the Coalition and the UK "are with you in this struggle all the way, heart and soul," before announcing that the UK would grant Kyiv access to long-range cruise-missile technology, "despite Russia's outrageous threats to my country."
French President Emmanuel Macron, who addressed allies remotely, warned that, "Russia will try to escalate against European countries in order to deter them from assisting Ukraine" and that NATO member states should be prepared.
Ukraine, too, continued its missile and drone strikes on Monday. These have hit deeper and deeper inside Russian territory, with target lists now expanded to include key Russian military and commercial infrastructure, such as logistics warehouses and oil storage facilities.
The damage created by these attacks prompted Russian President Vladimir Putin to announce on Monday that he had authorized the state take over of any infrastructure that is not being sufficiently protected or is not being repaired quickly enough.
WATCH: Does Ukraine's government still benefit from wartime unity?
On Ukraine's 35th Independence Day anniversary, President Zelenskyy struck a defiant tone.
Does this position risk creating divisions within Ukrainian society as the war with Russia drags on and is Zelenskyy's government still stable amid signs of war fatigue?
DW put these and other questions to Mikhail Alexseev, a professor of political science at San Diego State University.
His research focuses on democracy in Ukraine in the face of Russian aggression.
Putin authorizes infrastructure takeovers
Russian President Vladimir Putin has signed a presidential decree that will allow the Russian state to take control of critically important infrastructure facilities if they are deemed to be inadequately protected against Ukrainian attacks.
Reuters reports that under the decree, the state can take control of physical and financial assets, as well as ownership rights, if operators fail to protect critical facilities or are too slow to repair damage after an attack.
Ukraine has stepped up drone attacks on oil refineries and warehouses.
Overnight, Ukraine targeted four Ozon logistics hubs, according to Russia's second-largest online retailer.
Over the past few weeks, Ukraine repeatedly targeted warehouses belonging to the country's largest online marketplace, Wildberries.
While Kyiv argues that the retailer helps supply Russia's military, Moscow maintains that it serves only civilian purposes.
Putin last week ordered the government to rebuild commercial warehouses damaged or destroyed in Ukrainian attacks in recent weeks.
Ukraine and Russia release 10 captives each in prisoner swap
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy says 10 Ukrainian prisoners of war, previously listed as missing in action, have been released in a prisoner exchange.
Zelenskyy says the soldiers returned via Belarus. Minsk's BELTA state news agency also reported the swap, which saw 10 people returned to Russia.
According to Kyiv, the Ukrainians fought in Donetsk and were officially considered missing.
Prisoner swaps remain among the few areas of cooperation between Ukraine and Russia, with thousands of captives exchanged since Russia's full-scale invasion in February 2022.
UK's Burnham hails Ukraine as 'Europe's protector'
UK Prime Minister Andy Burnham said Ukraine is "Europe's protector, not a drain on our security but the front line in keeping Europe safe."
Speaking in Kyiv alongside Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and European Council President Antonio Costa, Burnham compared Ukraine's resistance to Russia to the UK's fight against Nazi Germany.
"My nation kept the flame of European freedom alive in the 20th century, you hold that flame in the 21st."
Burnham, making his first visit to the Ukrainian capital as prime minister, was due to announce British support to help Kyiv boost its domestic production of long-range missiles, a move the Kremlin has criticized while also warning the UK of "consequences" for supplying drones to Kyiv.
"Despite Russia's outrageous threats to my country, we will continue our support for Ukraine's defense," Burnham said.
Costa says Ukraine's EU future is key to long-term security
President of the European Council Antonio Costa on Monday pledged that the European Union will continue to support Ukraine for as long as necessary, "during the war, in future peace negotiations and in reconstruction."
Speaking in Kyiv at a ceremony marking the 35th anniversary of Ukraine's independence, Costa said Ukraine's future membership in the European Union will be its strongest guarantee for long-term security and democratic stability.
Costa said Ukraine's accession will be challenging but must not be delayed or derailed by political hesitation.
Costa made clear, too, that Russia had failed to achieve its objectives after more than four years of full-scale war at a heavy human and economic toll.
Costa added that the EU wants to see a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
"We support all serious initiatives aimed at achieving peace in Ukraine. But ultimately, it is Ukraine - and only Ukraine - that must define the terms of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace," he said.
"That peace must affirm Ukraine's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity," added Costa. "And it must guarantee Ukraine's long-term security and its ability to defend itself."
Kremlin says UK 'preventing peace' in Ukraine
Russia accused the UK of being a participant in the war on Ukraine's side.
The accusation comes as UK Prime Minister Andy Burnham reportedly intends to provide Ukraine with plans to build its own SCALP long-range cruise missiles, capable of hitting targets deep into Russia.
"Britain is involved in this war on the side of the Kyiv regime. Britain methodically and regularly adds fuel to the fire and methodically and regularly hatches schemes to prevent even the slightest progress in the peaceful settlement process," Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters in Moscow.
He added Russia would target and "destroy" facilities producing the missiles in Ukraine.
Ukraine wants peace but won't surrender, Zelenskyy says
Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelenskyy says his country wants peace but will not surrender territory to Russia to end the war.
"Ukraine absolutely wants peace, but it's not ready to simply surrender," Zelenskyy said.
Speaking during Ukraine's Independence Day celebrations, Zelenskyy rejected Russian demands that Ukraine give up the remaining parts of the Donbas region under its control.
"We will not let them [Russians] seize the initiative, deceive Europe and the entire world into thinking that we simply need to give up Donbas and everything will be over soon," he said.
Paying tribute to the people and soldiers defending Ukraine, Zelenskyy also urged allies to give it "everything" needed to stop the war.
Russian military launches Soyuz rocket with spacecraft
Russia launched a Soyuz rocket from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the country's north on Monday, according to the Russian Defense Ministry.
In a statement, the ministry said the rocket was carrying a spacecraft "in the interests of the Russian Ministry of Defense."
The cosmodrome is known for launches that place low-Earth-orbit Rassvet satellites into space, although it was not immediately clear whether this mission was intended for that purpose.
Rassvet is Russia's alternative to SpaceX's Starlink satellite network.
Earlier this month, Ukrainian intelligence officials said Russia plans to have 300 of these satellites in orbit by 2027.
Major General Vadym Skibitsky told RBC-Ukraine: "They have already begun launching it much faster than originally planned."
SpaceX currently has more than 10,000 satellites in orbit. Starlink is banned in Russia, and the use of its equipment can result in fines.
Ukrainian forces use Starlink to communicate on the battlefield.
EU approves further €6.1 billion for Ukraine's defense
The European Commission has approved an additional €6.1 billion ($7.12 billion) in financial aid for Ukraine to procure new defense systems.
Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said the money is for "air and missile defense systems, missiles, ammunition and radars that Ukraine urgently needs."
The EU said the latest aid package is in addition to €16 billion in previously approved procurement plans, of which €8.35 billion has already been disbursed.
Von der Leyen said Europe would stand with Ukraine, "as long as it takes."
Burnham arrives in Ukraine for Independence Day ceremony
UK Prime Minister Andy Burnham and European Council President Antonio Costa have arrived in Kyiv.
Burnham is on his first international visit since becoming prime minister.
He was welcomed at Kyiv Railway Station by Ukraine Foreign Minister Andrii Sybiha.
Burnham and Costa will meet with President Volodymyr Zelenskyy later and attend Ukraine's Independence Day celebrations.
Luxembourg Prime Minister Luc Frieden, Moldova's President Maia Sandu and Estonia's President Alar Karis were also in Kyiv to mark the 35th anniversary of Ukraine's independence with Sybiha.
Russia says it hit fuel tanker near Odesa
Russia's Defence Ministry has said its forces struck a tanker carrying fuel and lubricants for Ukrainian troops at the port of Pivdennyi near the southern city of Odesa.
The ministry said the attack also hit port infrastructure used to unload and store military cargo.
There was no immediate independent confirmation of the Russian claims.
Ukraine stepping up attacks on Russian e-commerce giant Ozon
Ukraine has struck warehouses belonging to Russian e-commerce giant Ozon on three consecutive days, with the company reporting another logistics center on fire.
The attacks mark an expansion of Kyiv's campaign against Russian logistics infrastructure after weeks of strikes on Wildberries, the country's largest online retailer.
Kyiv has accused Wildberries of supplying components to the Russian military.
Ozon said a "major fire" broke out at one of its logistics centers in the southern Krasnodar region following a drone attack.
"All systems operated as designed, and we promptly evacuated staff. Preliminarily, there are no casualties," the company said on Telegram.
On Sunday, Ozon said a drone attack caused a fire at its logistics hub in the central Orenburg region, forcing the warehouse to suspend operations.
That came a day after another Ozon center was hit in neighboring Samara, where the company said an unspecified number of employees were wounded.
WATCH - Unwilling soldiers: A stealth mass draft starting in Russia?
Russia has a growing manpower problem in its war against Ukraine. Rumors are spreading, and recent border queues near Georgia are drawing comparisons to the chaos of 2022.
Is Russia quietly preparing another draft? DW's Shannon Redstall explains.
Why is Ukraine struggling to defend itself against Russian air attacks?
In recent weeks and months, Russia has intensified its airstrikes on Ukraine, regularly firing dozens of ballistic missiles and drones, often at civilian targets.
To defend itself, Ukraine relies on advanced, foreign-made weapons systems - most importantly, US Patriot missiles.
The US war with Iran has depleted its own stockpiles, and Washington has resisted providing Kyiv with large numbers of missiles, leaving Ukraine more exposed to Russian bombs.
Even before the war with Iran, US support for Ukraine had wavered after Donald Trump returned to the White House in 2025.
Trump, who had an angry public spat with Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelenskyy at the White House, has sought to mend ties with Russia's Vladimir Putin, and ordered a pause of US military aid to Kyiv.
Over the weekend, Zelenskyy revealed that deliveries of Patriot interceptors had dropped by 50% since 2023.
"Over the entire year of 2023, Ukraine received 675 missiles, and over all of 2025 - 364, even though Russian missile strikes have increased," he said. "For 2026, as currently projected, it is 264."