What you need to know
- Police forcibly remove Rahul Gandhi and other opposition leaders from a protest outside PM Narendra Modi's residence
- The protesters are calling for Modi and his home minister, Amit Shah, to step down over a police crackdown against protesters on Monday
- The mostly young protesters have been calling for the resignation of India's education minister over medical exam paper leaks
- Modi tells MPs from his ruling coalition that strong action was taken against those involved in the leaks
- Cockroach Janta Party founder Abhijeet Dipke says protesters will not march to the parliament again to protest demonstrators against alleged 'police brutality'
- The CJP vows to continue the protest until the education minister resigns
- Activist Sonam Wangchuk, who has been on a hunger strike for 24 days in support of the CJP's demands, is moved to a private hospital
This blog is now closed. Thank you for reading.
Here are the latest developments from India on Tuesday, July 21, 2026:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Thank you for reading
Thank you for following our blog on the latest news events in India.
Stay tuned for more India news coverage from DW on Wednesday. See you then or phir milenge!
BJP president accuses Gandhi of 'anarchy,' disrespecting India's institutions
The national president of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has accused the leader of the opposition Congress party, Rahul Gandhi, of being a "symbol of anarchy."
In a video statement, Nitin Nabin said the rally that Gandhi had led outside Prime Minister Narendra Modi's residence on Tuesday was "not only unbecoming but also contrary to democratic norms and highly condemnable."
"In a democracy, it is the right of the opposition to protest, but there is a clear difference between protest and anarchy. When protest crosses the boundaries of decency, it becomes anarchy", Nabin said, adding that "Rahul Gandhi has become a symbol of anarchy."
Nabin also accused Gandhi and other Congress leaders of disrespecting the office of the prime minister.
"The way the atmosphere was made tense and disorderly towards the Prime Minister's residence is not just political opposition, but a sign of disrespect for democratic institutions and traditions," he said, calling the incident "unfortunate" and a "black day in India's political history."
WATCH: India's cockroach movement undeterred by police violence
India's cockroach movement is out on the streets for a second day of protest, despite being met by police violence the previous day. As pressure mounts on the government to implement change, protesters vowed not to budge.
Congress leaders slam 'anti-democratic' Modi government after detentions
Members of the opposition Indian Congress Party have accused the government of Narendra Modi of crushing dissent after Rahul Gandhi and other senior leaders were reportedly detained during a rally outside the prime minister's residence.
Himachal Pradesh Chief Minister Sukhvinder Singh Sukhu denounced the detentions, saying, "It is only when the opposition's voice is heard that it is called a democracy; otherwise, it becomes a dictatorship."
"The strength of democracy lies in dialogue and public trust, not in batons and suppression. It is unfortunate that instead of listening to their voices, the Central Government is adopting a repressive attitude," he said.
Sukhu also called for Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan to resign.
Congress General Secretary KC Venugopal, meanwhile, accused the Modi government of "brutality" and of being "completely anti-democratic."
Congress also posted videos on its official X account that apparently show party leaders Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi Vadra after they had been released by police.
It was not immediately clear whether either opposition leader had been charged.
WATCH: Is this India's Gen-Z revolution?
Tuesday's scenes outside the prime minister's official residence come a day after violent clashes in New Delhi between police and youth protesters.
DW looks at whether this movement is the start of Gen-Zers taking to the streets to demand change in India, as young people did in many countries across Asia and elsewhere in 2025.
IN DEPTH: How India's youth-led 'Cockroach' movement challenges Modi
What started as a satirical protest against exam leaks in India has grown into a wider movement voicing young Indians' anger over jobs and education.
Learn more about how the Cockroach movement has grown and how it plans to take on long-time prime minister Narendra Modi in this report.
Cockroach party calls off planned protest at police HQ
The Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) has called off a protest outside police headquarters planned for Tuesday night.
The move comes after police in New Delhi released all the students who were detained during protests on Monday, the party said.
"Huge victory for our movement! The Police has now released all detainees. They had illegally been detained for peacefully protesting for over a day, but the Police has had to bow down to public pressure," the CJP said on X.
Rahul Gandhi, opposition leaders detained outside Modi residence
Rahul Gandhi and other leaders of the opposition Congress party have been detained outside Prime Minister Narendra Modi's residence, according to DW's Adil Bhat, who is at the scene.
Congress' official X account also shared footage that appeared to show the opposition leader being detained by security officials, accusing Modi of "shameful" treatment of Gandhi and of overseeing a "dictatorship."
As we reported earlier, Gandhi, India's main opposition leader, had called for Modi and Union Home Minister Amit Shah to step down over the police crackdown against youth protesters on Monday.
Thousands of protestors were still camping in and around Jantar Mantar in downtown New Delhi on Tuesday.
The protest outside Modi's residence comes after the Indian parliament was adjourned for a second consecutive day on Tuesday, with the opposition demanding a discussion on exam paper leaks and other issues within India's education system.
What else has happened in India today?
We are taking a brief pause from our coverage of the Cockroach Janta Party protests to give you a roundup of other major developments in India today.
Sikkim tunnel blast leaves 10 dead, several missing
At least 10 people have died in India's Himalayan state of Sikkim after a suspected gas explosion triggered a tunnel collapse.
The incident occurred on Monday at state-owned National Hydroelectric Power Corporation's (NHPC) project on the Teesta river in Samardung village.
Seventeen others are feared trapped, local police chief Sonam Dolma told the media.
The NHPC said that a sudden burst of gas, suspected to be methane trapped or embedded in rocks in the tunnel, caused an explosion, dispersing fumes and toxic gas.
Rescuers are struggling to get to those trapped due to the hazardous gases inside the tunnel.
India summons Russian diplomat after Indian seafarers killed in Ukraine ship attack
India on Tuesday summoned a senior Russian diplomat in New Delhi to protest an attack on a cargo ship leaving Ukraine's Black Sea port of Odesa that killed four Indian nationals.
India's foreign ministry said it conveyed "grave concerns and unequivocal condemnation of the attack" to the Russian Chargé d'Affaires Vladimir Ladanov.
Commercial vessel MV Golden Leo was attacked on Sunday. It had five Indian nationals on board.
The ministry said in a statement that it had urged Ladanov to convey to Moscow "India's strong concerns" that "the targeting of commercial shipping and the resulting loss of innocent civilian lives are unacceptable and must be avoided".
Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters that Moscow was in touch with New Delhi on the issue.
"We are explaining our position. Most importantly, our armed forces are striking - and will continue to strike - vessels involved in transporting ammunition, weapons, and so on for the purposes of the Kyiv regime," Peskov said.
Rahul Gandhi demands Modi's resignation for 'destroying the future of India's youth'
India's main opposition leader Rahul Gandhi has called for Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union Home Minister Amit Shah's resignation over Monday's police crackdown on youth protesters.
Gandhi and other members of his Congress party, including his sister Priyanka, held a demonstration outside Modi's official residence in New Delhi on Tuesday afternoon.
The protest comes after the Indian parliament was adjourned over disruptions for a second day in a row on Tuesday, as the opposition demanded a discussion on paper leaks and other issues within India's education system.
"We have marched to PM Modi's house to demand answers from him for the brutalities against young students yesterday," Gandhi said on X
"The Government doesn't want to take any accountability or does it want to have a debate on it in Parliament. PM and HM must resign for destroying the future of India's youth," he added.
Court allows Sonam Wangchuk to move to private hospital - reports
The Delhi High Court has allowed hunger-striking activist Sonam Wangchuk to be transferred from a government hospital to a private one, following a petition filed by his wife alleging that he was in "illegal detention," legal news websites LiveLaw and Bar and Bench reported on Tuesday.
The court decided that transferring Wangchuk to a hospital of his choice "will be in fulfilment of requirements of ensuring his fundamental rights".
The court directed the private hospital to constitute a team of doctors to "constantly monitor" Wangchuk's medical condition.
In a statement released on Monday night, Wangchuk said, "Seeing [the] police brutality on students, I vow to continue my hunger strike till the youth leaders are allowed to present their grievances in the parliament directly to the MPs."
The 59-year-old has been on a hunger strike since June 28 in support of the Cockroach Janta Party's demands for the Indian education minister's resignation.
On Saturday, police forcibly removed Wangchuk from the stage at Jantar Mantar where he was holding his hunger strike, saying that they were acting on orders of the same court over health concerns.
Strong visuals emerged as police officials, most of whom were not in uniform, climbed onto the stage and led the activist out, shielding him from view using white bedsheets.
Wangchuk's removal from the protest site gave a renewed vigor to the protest movement as thousands of young people arrived at Jantar Mantar over the next two days ahead of Monday's march.
The activist has reportedly continued his hunger protest from the hospital.
Earlier in the day, CJP founder Abhijeet Dipke marked the 24th day of Wangchuk's hunger strike.
Health minister meets injured CJP protesters
India's Union Health Minister J P Nadda on Tuesday met protesters injured in clashes with police during Monday's Cockroach party protest march as he visited two hospitals in New Delhi, news agency ANI reported.
The minister also met with the doctors to take stock of the conditions of those injured and the medical care they were receiving, ANI reported.
Representatives from the CJP had on Monday handed a written document with their demands to Nadda, marking an opening of talks between the protesters and the Modi government.
DW correspondent: Delhi youth protests a 'people's movement'
The protesters who showed up on Delhi's streets on Monday didn't seem like they were necessarily inspired by the Cockroach Janta party or its founder Abhijeet Dipke.
The outpouring on the street on Monday was an opportunity for people across India to express their deep discontent with the government of Prime Minister Narendra Modi - especially the highhandedness with which Sonam Wangchuk [the activist on hunger strike in solidarity with the student protests] was treated.
Within hours, the protest seemed like it was led by the students themselves; it didn't need instructions from anyone. Despite an internet ban and lack of clarity on the march to parliament, protesters led on, making it truly a people's movement.
The widespread protest is seen as the biggest challenge to Modi's 12-year tenure. Young people have been frustrated over the lack of jobs. The 'Cockroach' movement tapped into that anger that has been simmering for years.
Even as the government has shown an inclination to consider their demands, it may not be enough to immediately calm tempers on the ground. The youth expect a complete overhaul of the education system which has been mired in allegations of corruption.
Modi breaks silence on medical exam paper leaks amid 'Cockroach' protest
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi has told MPs of his coalition that strong action was taken against those involved in the NEET medical exam paper leaks, Parliamentary Affairs Minister Kiren Rijiju told the media on Tuesday.
The remarks come a day after youth protesters, angered by a slew of such paper leaks, gathered in massive numbers for a protest walk to the parliament.
Modi brought up the paper leaks at his ruling National Democratic Alliance's (NDA) parliamentary party meeting.
The prime minister said at the meeting that 13 people were arrested and sent to jail after reports of the leaks surfaced, Rijiju said.
"At the same time, to ensure that students' future was not affected, the NEET re-examination was given priority, conducted successfully, and the results were declared without delay," Rijiju quoted Modi as saying.
Modi described the leaks as a "grave sin" and told NDA lawmakers that strict steps have been taken to prevent such paper leaks in the future.
What does India's 'Cockroach' movement want?
The Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) that started out as a satire movement online two months ago, on Monday was able to galvanize one of the largest anti-government protest rallies India has seen in recent years.
Since June 20, the movement has been holding a sit-in demonstration in New Delhi demanding an overhaul of India's education system.
Protesters are angered by a series of entrance test paper leaks, including those of a crucial medical school entrance exam called National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (NEET).
The NEET paper leak in May forced over two million students to retake the highly-competitive exam, leading to some young aspirants taking their own lives.
Protesters allege that the leaks are a sign of a corruption-ridden education system.
Aside from the education minister's resignation, the CJP's list of demands also include a compensation of 10 million rupees (€91,000 and $104,000) for the families of each of the students who took their own lives.
They also seek the release of prominent social activist Sonam Wangchuk, who was forcibly removed from the protest site in Jantar Mantar and taken to a hospital last Saturday as he observed a days-long hunger-strike in support of the demand.