What you need to know
Below is a roundup of the top headlines on the Iran war and other developments in the wider Middle East region on Saturday, September 5.
- Explosions near Kharg Island, Iranian media reports
- US and Iranian officials have not officially commented on the reports
- US Ambassador to Israel Mike Huckabee visits West Bank village home to Palestinian-Americans amid rise of settler attacks
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Israel, Hezbollah flare-up in southern Lebanon
Despite a ceasefire that went into effect over two months ago, flare-ups are continuing between Israel and Hezbollah over one strategic hill in southern Lebanon.
Fighting between Israel and Hezbollah, a Shiite political party and paramilitary group supported by Iran, intensified once again earlier this year in the wider context of the US-Iran war. The US, Germany and several Arab countries consider Hezbollah a terrorist organization, whereas the EU only deems Hezbollah's armed wing a terror group.
While the fiercest battles are over, the two sides are still in conflict over the Ali Taher hill, which overlooks the city of Nabatiyeh. According to the Lebanese Health Ministry, at least five people have died and 24 have been injured in the fighting since Friday.
The United States, which has mediated peace talks, has wanted Hezbollah to hand the hill over the Lebanese government, but the militant group has refused to withdraw from certain positions north of the Litani river where Ali Taher sits.
There are fears that the fighting could escalate into an all-out battle for Nabatiyeh and lead to more violence across Lebanon, complicating efforts to resolve the war in Iran.
US Ambassador to Israel Mike Huckabee in West Bank
US Ambassador to Israel Mike Huckabee was in the occupied West Bank on Saturday to meet with Palestinian-Americans who have faced violent attacks from Israeli settlers in recent months.
"Our clear message is that crime is crime, terror is terror. When people do it they should have an expectation that they will have severe consequences," Huckabee told reporters from the town of Turmus Ayya, but declined to directly criticize Israeli policy.
This year has seen a significant uptick in Israeli settlers attacking Palestinian homes in the West Bank, including shootings and arson attacks.
Explosions heard near Iran's Kharg Island, reports say
Official Iranian news agencies reported a strike near the fuel hub of Kharg Island that appeared to target an oil tanker.
However, they also reported that no smoke could be seen rising from the area.
Neither the US nor the Iranian government have commented on the strikes
After a lull in fighting, the US began striking Iranian targets again last Sunday. The war has now entered its seventh month.
Welcome to our coverage
As the US risks sliding into another "forever war," Iranian broadcasters have reported strikes of unknown origin on Kharg Island.
Meanwhile, US Ambassador to Israel Mike Huckabee is due to visit Palestinian-Americans in West Bank towns that have come under Israeli settler attacks.
Follow here for all the latest headlines from Iran and the wider Middle East with DW.