What you need to know
- German Interior Minister Dobrindt says Germany needs stronger powers to counter drones and hybrid threats
- Energy CEO Markus Krebb said rules designed for 'peacetime' are no longer enough against sabotage
- German inflation rose to 2.9% in August, its highest level since late 2023
- The increase was driven mainly by higher energy prices, especially fuel and heating oil
This blog is now closed. Here is a roundup of top stories from and about Germany on Thursday September 10, 2026:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add DW as a Preferred Source on Google.
Emirates to fly to Berlin's BER in future, its fifth German destination
More UAE-related news amid Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed's visit to Berlin.
Germany's government has approved the Emirates airline in future flying into "a fifth German airport," according to a statement issued amid the visit.
The government does not explicitly name Berlin's BER airport, but the airline had been expressing a wish to add Berlin to its list of destinations for years.
It would also make geographical sense, seeing as Emirates already flies into Frankfurt, Munich, Düsseldorf and Hamburg - leaving the most obvious gap in its coverage in the northeast and near the German capital.
"The additional flights for the airline are limited to a maximum of seven per week," Transport Minister Steffen Bilger said. "At the same time we are excluding the possiblity of flight offerings from the airport to third countries." In other words, that means Emirates will only be permitted to operate Berlin flights to and from UAE.
The state of Brandenburg's Transport Ministry responded positively, saying the move "creates the conditions for a regular Emirates connection to the Berlin-Brandenburg airport."
Berlin's Mayor Kai Wegner said the daily fligths would "bring two economic growth regions even closer together."
German flag carrier Lufthansa, which had long resisted such a move, responded critically, saying the agreement "relocates economic productivity and jobs to the Gulf and further strengthens unfair competition."
Lufthansa accuses Gulf airlines like Emirates and Qatar Airways of not operating on a level playing field for a variety of reasons, it had been lobbying the German government to restrict their access not expand it.
Police operation outside Ukrainian consulate in Düsseldorf after being alerted to potential threat
Police deployed outside the Ukrainian consulate in Düsseldorf on Thursday evening, cordoning off a stretch of road near the building for around two hours.
Düsseldorf is the state capital of North Rhine-Westphalia and so is home to a host of consulates.
A police spokeswoman said that officers were responding to an indication of a potential threat. She said that the operation began at around 5:30 p.m. (1530 GMT).
Multiple police vehicles could be seen at the site and police restricted access to the immediate vicinity during the operation.
Authorities said that police searched the building and the environs but that the indication of a threat could not be corroborated. The operation was therefore brought to a halt at around 7:15 p.m..
Berlin's SPD mayoral candidate Krach denies wrongdoing, plans to run despite legal probe
The Social Democrat (SPD) mayoral candidate for the upcoming elections in the city-state of Berlin, Steffen Krach, has said he will still compete in the election as planned.
This is despite the news that Krach is facing an investigation on suspicion of corruption, which came to light as three properties connected to him including his family home were searched on Wednesday.
"I will continue to fight for every vote for the SPD," Krach said, as party leaders like Lars Klingbeil and Franziska Giffey also voiced support.
Krach admitted the timing of the news could scarcely have been worse, saying he wanted to focus on his policy plans and the challenges Berlin faces, but "now, sadly, that's all taking a back seat."
Krach held a press conference in Berlin on Thursday and explained why he believed he was under investigation, also asserting that he believed he had done nothing wrong and that he had nothing to hide.
Why does Krach believe he is under investigation?
Krach told reporters that he thinks the probe revolves around a €9,900 (roughly $11,500) donation to the SPD that was returned to the donor shortly after it was given.
He said it hailed from a person who was bidding for a government contract in Lower Saxony and who Krach had supported.
Krach said that a few days after the donation was given, when he found out who it hailed from, he ordered that it be returned. He said he could demonstrate it was repaid, and shared the documentation with Berlin's RBB public broadcaster.
The would-be donor also ultimately did not win the tender, Krach said.
Krach also said that he did not report having returned the donation to its source, and said he did not know if he was obliged to do so, saying that would be up to prosecutors to determine. "For me, the case was closed with the return of the money," he said.
Prosecutors have for now only said that Krach has been under investigation since September 3 on suspicion of bribery-related offenses, and stressed that the presumption of innocence applies as always.
The news has struck in the midst of a close-run election in Berlin where five parties - the SPD, the Left Party, the CDU, the AfD and the Greens - all could still harbor at least some hopes of emerging as the largest single party if the final phase of campaigning goes well.
Basektball World Cup: Hosts Germany reach semifinals
Germany's medal hopes at home in the FIBA women's basketball World Cup remain on track.
The hosts beat Belgium 93-74 in the third quarterfinal game of the day.
Deadeye shooting from distance propelled the team to victory as Germany shot an impressive 61% from 3-point range, and an extremely reliable 87% from the free throw line.
Nyara Sabally and Lenoie Fiebich both provided double doubles for their team, with Sabally scoring 16 and grabbing 12 rebounds while Fiebich scored 17 and gobbled up 10 boards.
Australia and Spain are yet to play in the last quarterfinal of the day, the US and France are already through to the final four.
Mannheim area hit by 3.3-magnitude earthquake
According to the GFZ Helmholtz Centre for Geosciences and the regional earthquake service, an earthquake measuring at least 3.3 shook the Mannheim area in western Germany.
The earthquake service for the southwest of Germany reported a "weak earthquake" at 5:27 p.m. (15:27 GMT) near the city of Worms in the state of Rhineland-Palatinate.
A dpa reporter in Worms reported that the tremor was clearly felt inside buildings in the city center. The buildings shook for several seconds. Initial information from emergency services indicates that no damage was reported.
A police spokesman told dpa that they had received multiple calls as a result of the tremor but no reports of damage or injury.
The earthquake was likely to have been discernible within a 20-kilometer (roughly 12.5-mile) radius of the epicenter, according to the authorities.
Minor earthquakes are deceptively common in most of Germany, with the north and northeast least likely to be affected. Most of them are so small that they can barely be felt, however.
Larger quakes are very rare: Since 1911, only around 10 quakes above magnitude 5 are on record, the most recent a 2004 tremor in the southwestern Waldkirch area near Lake Constance and the Swiss border. Magnitude 5 is typically seen as the level at which a quake can potentially become threatening in the right circumstances.
UAE to invest €40 billion in Germany
During President Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan's state visit to Berlin, it was announced by Emirati officials and the German government that the United Arab Emirates plans to invest €40 billion (roughly $46.5 billion) in Germany.
This will more than double the Gulf state's investment in the German economy to date, which totalled around €34 billion.
The Emirati technology minister, Sultan Al Jaber, said that Germany has been "an important strategic and economic partner" for his country for decades.
He added that the planned additional investments underscored the UAE's intention to further expand the relationship.
Meanwhile, Berlin said that the two presidents, Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Zayed Al Nahyan, "welcomed the announcement of a UAE investment package totaling €40 billion in Germany."
"The package includes investments in advanced digital infrastructure, including the development of new state-of-the-art data centers", it added.
The United Arab Emirates is Germany's largest trading partner in the Gulf region by volume. Last year, the value of bilateral trade was just over €13 billion. Germany exported goods worth approximately €11 billion, while imports amounted to about €2 billion.
Dortmund Zoo's dozen new lion cubs prompt debate on species preservation
The social media curation crew at Dortmund Zoo might have had easier weeks in the office than this one.
Around a month ago, they announced the arrival of a dozen new lion cubs, five born to lionness Zuri on July 28 and seven more birthed by Saba three days later.
At the time of the birth, the zoo had posted online that "Zoos fulfill an important role in the preservation of these impressive animals and support international species preservation."
This claim has gradually come to the attention of enviorenmental and animal rights campaigners like Robert Marc Lehmann, a highly outspoken critic of keeping animals in captivity, and other social media activists.
This week's update photos on the cubs have been attracting an unusually large number of mainly critical responses, including from Lehmann, who said that "zoo-crossbreeds" were of little or no relevance to the preservation of more distinct genetic species.
"I don't mean to imply that you only bred cute baby animals for the visitors," he said in a sarcastic response to one of the zoo's posts.
Regional broadcaster WDR on Thursday reported that it had contacted Dortmund city authorities, which own the zoo, to ask about whether the breeding efforts had been conducted in conjunctions with species preservation projects like the EAZA Ex-Situ Programme (EEP) run by European zoos that aims to preserve endagnered species with targeted relocation and breeding efforts.
It also asked if reports of the cubs being crossbreed of two disinct lion types were correct, and if they were, what conservation value they might have. The broadcaster said it had received a response saying authorities needed "a little time" to answer these questions and arrange a visit by a camera crew.
Women's basketball World Cup: US trounces Hungary, France bests China
It's quarterfinal day at the women's basketball World Cup in the Geman capital.
All four games in the round are being played on the same day, running from late morning until late tonight in the Berlin Arena.
Tournament favorites and winners the last five times out, the US, got the action started by trouncing Hungary in the first quarterfinal.
The US won the game 108-56, racing to a 24-point lead in the very first quarter and never looking back.
Star guard Caitlin Clark had 10 points, albeit on mediocre shooting splits, and created nine baskets for her teammates. Forward Napheesa Collier meanwhile led the US in points and rebounds, scoring 19 and grabbing seven boards.
In the second game of the day, France got the better of China, winning 90-61. The European favorites pulled clear in the second quarter, taking a 17-point lead into the locker room at half time and building on it after the break.
Hosts Germany are in action next, against Belgium. Australia and Spain will lock horns in the late game tonight.
Both semifinals will be played on Saturday, the third-place playoff and the final follow on Sunday.
Alleged power saboteur compiled list of 160 possible targets
The interior minister of North Rhine-Westphalia (NRW), Herbert Reul, has told the state's parliamentary interior affairs committee that the alleged saboteur of electricity targets in Germany was planning well over 100 similar attacks.
The suspect, identified only as Daniel V., was arrested on Tuesday in NRW after several similar sabotage attempts across the country.
Reul told the parliamentary committee on Thursday that he was targeting 40 electricity sites in NRW alone, planning similar attacks designed to create short circuits and brief power outages.
Reul said that police found a "notebook with several handwritten entries" on more than 160 potential sabotage targets. Some of them lay beyond Germany's borders in neighboring countries, he said.
"We did not just apprehend the suspected culprit," Reul said, "we also potentially prevented many more attacks."
The minister said the investigations were ongoing, but the scope of the suspect's apparent plans did raise the question of potential accomplices. "Or also, whether he might have been hired by foreign powers after all," Reul said.
He stressed that for now there was no evidence to suggest this, but said the investigations continued at pace and it was considered a possibility.
The case followed fairly soon after the alleged failed drone attack at Leipzig/Halle Airport, which the government in Berlin says was an attempted hybrid attack by Russia. The sabotage efforts also took place in the build-up to Sunday's election in Saxony-Anhalt.
UAE's Mohamed bin Zayed received with military honors in Berlin
The leader of the United Arab Emirates has begun his state visit to Germany.
President Frank-Walter Steinmeier rolled out the red carpet for his Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan. Security was tight for the president's visit, with Berlin cordoning off flag-lined streets and deploying large numbers of police.
The trip comes more than six months after the start of the US war against Iran that has dramatically impacted shipping and commerce in the Gulf region and unsettled the already fragile political balance there.
Bin Zayed is expected to meet Chancellor Friedrich Merz later on Thursday in Berlin. The two countries are expected to make a series of joint announcements on new investment, business, technology, AI and energy plans.
CDU's Spahn apologizes for being 'too cowardly' on surrogacy issue that led to his resignation
Senior Christian Democrat (CDU) politician Jens Spahn has written a letter of apology to party members in his constituency in North Rhine-Westphalia after the surrogacy scandal that led to the openly gay politician's resignation as the leader of the CDU/CSU parliamentary group in the Bundestag, the lower house of the German parliament.
Spahn stepped down in mid-July after announcing that he and his husband had used a surrogate mother in the US as a means to become parents.
Using surrogate mothers in Germany is not legal, and the CDU opposes the notion. Spahn made use of a loophole permitting people to use surrogates abroad, but was accused both of hypocrisy and of undermining his party's position.
After stern criticism even from Chancellor Friedrich Merz, he resigned his post, seemingly jumping before he was pushed.
Spahn wrote in the letter that the "split between my private decision to have a child using surrogacy and the reasonable expectations of me as a leader of our party" became greater "than I had expected."
He conceded that in hindsight, it might have been better to announce his intentions ahead of time, rather than to wait and come forward only once the child had arrived safely.
"I was too cowardly to publicly declare my colors on this sensitive issue," Spahn wrote in the letter. "I wanted to avoid a difficult debate, also to protect my expectant family - and in doing so I ultimately brought about a much more difficult debate."
Spahn had always held a slightly conflicted ideological position within the CDU: a relatively rare openly gay party member in a same sex marriage who at the same time liked to portray himself as a traditional conservative and Roman Catholic on the party's right flank.
NATO chief praises Germany as driver of European defense
NATO Secretary General Mark Rutte has praised Germany as a driving force behind efforts to strengthen Europe's defense capabilities, while warning that the threat from Russia remains high.
Speaking at the closing of the German Foreign Ministry's annual ambassadors' conference in Berlin, Rutte welcomed the government's decision to raise defense spending to 3.5% of gross domestic product by 2029.
Germany now spends more on defense than any other European country and has become a major driver of arms production, Rutte said.
"You have shifted into sixth gear on defense," he said.
Turning to Russia's war against Ukraine, Rutte said Moscow was continuing its attacks unabated and suffering more than 40,000 soldiers killed or seriously wounded each month.
He also warned that Russian hybrid attacks in Europe were increasing, including cyberattacks, sabotage and operations involving drones.
Following the drone incident in Leipzig in early August, Rutte assured Germany of NATO's full solidarity. The German government has blamed Russia for the attempted attack.
Rutte said NATO would continue supporting Ukraine while accelerating efforts to strengthen its own defense capabilities.
Europe was increasingly taking responsibility for its own security, he said, with the goal of building "a stronger European pillar in a strong NATO."
German Finance Ministry rejects Ifo defense debt criticism
Germany's Finance Ministry has rejected criticism from the Ifo Institute over the government's use of additional borrowing for defense spending.
The ministry said Ifo had applied the wrong benchmark when calculating how much of the extra debt had actually resulted in higher defense expenditure.
"The Ifo study does not apply the legal criteria that the Bundestag and Bundesrat enshrined in the Basic Law [Germany's constitution] with the exemption of defense spending from the debt brake," the ministry said.
"The study is therefore legally and methodologically wrong. It is comparing apples with oranges."
Ifo: Germany diverted 'debt brake' defense borrowing to other spending
The Munich-based Ifo economic research institute has accused the German government of using additional borrowing intended to create more room for defense spending for other purposes.
The Ifo said on Thursday that 38.5% of the additional debt taken on in 2025 under an exemption from Germany's constitutional debt brake did not translate into additional defense and security spending.
"A large part of the additional debt did not lead to additional defense spending," Ifo researcher Emilie Höslinger said. "Instead, the extra spending capacity freed up in the core budget was used for other purposes."
Germany changed its constitutional debt rules in March 2025, exempting defense and certain security spending above 1% of gross domestic product from the country's debt brake.
The measure was approved by the outgoing parliament with the support of the conservative Christian Democratic Union and Christian Social Union, the center-left Social Democratic Party and the Greens.
Ifo found that relevant defense-related spending increased by €17.6 billion ($20.6 billion), while €28.6 billion ($33.5 billion) in debt was taken on under the exemption.
That left €11 billion ($12.9 billion) in additional borrowing that did not correspond to additional defense and security expenditure, Ifo said - equivalent to 38.5% of the total.
Dobrindt warns of growing threats to German security
German Interior Minister Alexander Dobrindt has defended plans to give security authorities greater investigative powers, accusing critics of putting people's safety at risk amid what he described as a heightened threat to Germany.
Speaking during a parliamentary debate on his ministry's 2027 budget, Dobrindt, of the conservative Christian Social Union, said the proposed powers were necessary to "protect our freedom."
"The threat level is high and is coming from different places," Dobrindt said.
He pointed to an explosives-laden drone discovered at Leipzig/Halle Airport as evidence of the security challenges facing Germany, adding that Russia was clearly behind the incident and that it was "not an isolated event."
Dobrindt has pushed for stronger measures against drones and hybrid threats. He said under his leadership, the federal and state governments have established a new joint drone defense center, while a Joint Center for Countering Hybrid Threats (GAZ Hybrid) opened in June.
"We are rebuilding the pillars of security architecture," Dobrindt said on Thursday.
The Interior Ministry's budget is set to increase by more than €950 million ($1.1 billion) to €16.7 billion ($19.5 billion).
The Federal Criminal Police Office and Federal Police are among the agencies set to receive additional personnel.
Germany's Federal Office for Information Security, which is responsible for cybersecurity, is also due to receive more funding.
Sonja Eichwede, deputy parliamentary leader of the center-left Social Democratic Party, highlighted additional spending planned for the Federal Agency for Technical Relief, saying it was important for civil protection and disaster response.