What you need to know
- The BND foreign intelligence agency has noted a "new, more dangerous dimension" to the confrontation with Russia.
- The Left Party is suing Economy Minister Katherina Reiche at the Constitutional Court for using official government channels to criticize it
- Grassroots groups from junior coalition partners the SPD have objected to several elements in a proposed reform of labor laws
- A draft bill envisages making it easier for victims of domestic violence to move away from perpetrators
- 100,000 households have received an e-vehicle subsidy since May, the environment minister says
This blog has now closed. Read below for a roundup of the stories from and about Germany hitting the headlines on Monday, October 5, 2026:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add DW as a Preferred Source on Google.
Air traffic in Stuttgart suspended due to hoax bomb threat
Germany's Stuttgart Airport saw the temporary suspension of all departures and arrivals due to a bomb threat that turned out to be a hoax.
Police looked into a claim a man had made to an employee that he had been carrying a bomb in his luggage, which resulted in the terminal being evacuated and all air traffic being stopped.
Germany's Federal Police said no threat was detected, and the airport's operations resumed shortly after the threat was found to be not true.
The 24-year-old man who claimed to be carrying a bomb is under investigation for allegedly disturbing the peace by making threats of criminal offenses.
German Book Prize best novel award goes to Shida Bazyar for 'The Gaps'
The 2026 German Book Prize has been awarded to Shida Bazyar for her novel "Die Lücken" (which could perhaps be translated as "The Gaps"), with the jury describing her book as "a novel against ambivalence."
The book is set in fictional community, Heimesbach in Hunsrück, "in which 90 years of German history have nested themselves in the walls and the biographies," as the prizegivers put it.
"The novel leads us through the years and the heads of those who shaped the village: from Jewish families who lost everything, via Nazi profiteers, who later reinvented themselves as innocent hangers-on, through the Sharifi and Karimpour families, who fled from Iran decades later," the book prize writes. "Shida Bazyar succeeds in providing a virtuoso storytelling mosaic about the burden of history, the lie of the new start, and the desire to finally find a home."
The jury praised Bazyar's storytelling format in particular, saying it was an ideal vehicle to convey disparate and yet interconnected ideas.
"The author chooses compelling literary strategies: The view of an omniscient narrator, and the caleidoscopic structure of the text make it possible to jump between times and to create both closeness and distance at the same time," they wrote in their explanation for the award.
The 38-year-old Bazyar was born in Germany to Iranian parents who fled in the 1980s.
"It's not so easy for me to truly experience joy, I have to say," Bazyar said in her acceptance speech. "Because it is quite a strange feeling when you write a novel about people who were persecuted, terrorized and murdered. To then be truly happy about its success, that doesn't seem quite right to me." Therefore, Bazyar said, she'd like to dedicate the accolades to the people the book is about.
Bazyar also made this year's shortlist for the International Booker Prize for her debut novel from 2016, "The Nights are Quiet in Tehran," which became a hit when translated into English in 2025.
READ - Merz, Macron call for tougher EU tools against unfair trade
Chancellor Friedrich Merz and French President Emmanuel Macron have written to the EU's Ursula von der Leyen, saying the bloc needs tougher - and faster - means to respond to unfair trade practices by third countries.
Their appeal names no names but it seems most likely to have China in its crosshairs, or just maybe the US under Donald Trump's erratic trade policies.
This comes days before the EU trade commissioner heads to Beijing for talks, and just over a week before this month's EU leaders' summit, where the issue might well come up again.
Merz tells pupils: Do better in school than I did
German Chancellor Friedrich Merz has returned to his former high school on a visit marking the school's 100th anniversary, telling pupils they should aim for better grades than he managed.
Merz graduated from the Friedrich-Spee-Gymnasium in Rüthen, western Germany, 51 years ago.
"Do a slightly better Abitur than I did," the chancellor told pupils, referring to Germany's school-leaving qualification that allows students to attend university.
Merz has kept his exact final grade a closely guarded secret. Last year, he joked that his school certificate was locked in a safe at home.
He did, however, suggest that his overall grade was somewhere around 3.8 - a relatively poor result in Germany's grading system.
Merz has previously said he lacked discipline and motivation at school and at one point had to repeat a year.
"I didn't have difficulties with school; the school had difficulties with me," he joked on Monday.
He said things improved after he changed schools and moved to Rüthen, where mathematics and physics eventually became two of his favorite subjects.
Hundreds of pupils greeted Merz on his return, with some calling out "Hello, Chancellor" as he arrived.
The visit came less than a week after Merz presented the German School Award in Berlin, where he said he wanted to focus more personally on education policy and visit schools more frequently.
Germany plans new naval base in Emden
Germany plans to build a new naval base in the northern city of Emden as it expands its armed forces.
The federal government and the state of Lower Saxony signed a declaration of intent for the project on Monday, the Defense Ministry said.
Germany currently has only one North Sea naval base, in Wilhelmshaven. The ministry said it would not have enough capacity to accommodate the navy's planned expansion.
"New ships and boats need berths. Our soldiers need accommodation and training facilities," Defense Minister Boris Pistorius said.
Pistorius said the new base could create up to 2,000 military posts and that Emden's access to the Atlantic made it an ideal location.
Lower Saxony Premier Olaf Lies said the aim was for the base to be operational by the early 2030s.
Chinese high-tech could be security risk - domestic intelligence agency
High-tech goods from China, such as electric vehicles or even robot vacuum cleaners, could represent a security risk, the BfV domestic intelligence agency has warned.
BfV head Sinan Selen told a hearing of parliament's intelligence oversight committee in Berlin that the issue was of "great concern" to him.
"I already see substantial shortcomings that create potential for abuse," he said.
Data collected via the products could be passed on to "state agencies", he said, leading to risks including "potential shutdown of entire products."
"In terms of resilience and availability (this) could confront us with problems," he said.
The warning comes as sales of high-tech products to Germany are growing and Chinese manufacturers compete ever more strongly with their German counterparts.
Deutsche Telekom targets billions in AI savings
Deutsche Telekom plans to use artificial intelligence and automation to cut annual costs by around €2.5 billion ($2.9 billion) by 2030.
The target covers the German telecommunications giant's operations outside the United States.
Deutsche Telekom is already using AI for repetitive tasks in network operations, customer service, software development and administration.
Its "Frag Magenta" chatbot handled around 2.6 million customer service calls in the first half of 2026, the company said.
At T-Mobile US, in which Deutsche Telekom holds a majority stake, AI agents now handle 40% of customer contacts.
Outside the US, Deutsche Telekom expects savings from AI and automation to reach €1.1 billion by 2027 and €2.5 billion by 2030.
"AI is fundamentally changing Deutsche Telekom," CEO Tim Höttges said. He said the technology was improving networks and customer service while opening up new business models."
IN DEPTH: Germany trainer Klopp's first internationals
The German football team has had its first four international matches under its new coach, Jürgen Klopp - a mixture of success, failure and in-betweens.
DW analyzes Klopp's methods and relationship with the team as shown over the past couple of months in this article: Klopp's first Germany internationals: What did we learn?
Social Democrat groups oppose coalition's working week reform
Grassroots groups within the Social Democrats (SPD) - the junior partner in Germany's conservative-led coalition government - have spoken out against plans to "flexibilize" the working week in a position paper.
In question is a paragraph in the coalition agreement that speaks of "the possibility of a weekly rather than a daily maximum working time."
The conservative Christian Democrat (CDU)-Christian Social Union (CSU) bloc has pushed to have a maximum number of hours that can be worked per week rather than the current daily standard limit of eight hours.
Although the four SPD groups fundamentally accept the idea, they are calling for strict controls, among other things wanting collective labor agreements under which both parties work out details as "a necessary prerequisite."
They also say exceptions should made in certain sectors where illegal employment is prevalent.
Employers' associations in June objected to the idea of collective labor agreements as a coercive measure when it was put forward by the Labor Ministry, leading to its retraction, with the CDU saying that it went against the coalition agreement.
The position paper submitted by the SPD groups could thus lead to a new split in the coalition, stating as it does: "It is not in keeping with a modern reform of working hours regulation or a better compatibility of work and family when bosses can decide alone when employees can knock off work."
German court sets limits on deportation detention
Germany's Federal Court of Justice (BGH) has ruled that a person facing deportation cannot be detained as a flight risk simply because their past behavior suggests they might try to avoid being deported.
The case concerned a stateless Palestinian man who sought asylum at a police station in Germany in April 2023. Austrian authorities had already issued a decision requiring him to return.
A court in the German city of Duisburg ordered the man detained while his transfer was being arranged.
The courts argued that his previous actions indicated a risk that he would try to evade deportation. He had lived in Austria since 2020, where two asylum applications had been rejected, and had also applied for asylum in Belgium and Germany.
But the man had never explicitly said that he intended to avoid deportation.
The BGH ruled that his behavior alone was not enough to establish this particular ground for detention.
A person's words do not necessarily have to state the intention literally, the judges said. But it must be "clear and unambiguous" from what the person says and the circumstances that they intend to evade deportation.
The court found that the man's detention from May 7 to June 6, 2023 had therefore violated his rights.
German immigration law provides several other grounds on which people can be detained pending deportation.
IN DEPTH: Two German scientists in Nobel-winning trio
Peter Hegemann from Germany's Humbolt University and Georg Nagel from the University of Würzburg have won this year's Nobel Prize in medicine alongside their US colleague, Karl Deisseroth.
You can read more about their achievements in this article: German and US scientists win Nobel Prize in medicine
Germany at risk of 'violent conflict' with Russia - intelligence chief
Germany is facing a growing risk of a violent confrontation with Russia as Moscow continues a campaign of hybrid warfare with other countries in Europe, the head of Germany's BND foreign intelligence service warned on Monday.
Speaking before the Bundestag at the annual public hearing of intelligence chiefs, Martin Jäger said: "The confrontation we are facing with Russia has taken on a new, more dangerous dimension."
"Germany is in danger of becoming embroiled in a violent conflict with Russia - the attempted attack in Leipzig is just one example," he said.
"No other country currently poses such a direct, comprehensive, and concrete threat to Germany," he added.
Jäger was referring to a drone attack at Leipzig airport in August that the German government has blamed on Russia.
Russia has repeatedly denied any intention of attacking NATO
countries, with President Vladimir Putin, however, saying on Thursday: "But if we are subjected to aggression, we will have no choice but to respond."
Draft bill aims to help domestic abuse victims move house
The Justice Ministry has put forward a draft bill making it easier for domestic abuse victims to leave joint tenancy contracts and obliging perpetrators to pay for any ensuing costs.
"The path to a self-determined and safe life after domestic abuse is often still a long one," Justice Minister Stefanie Hubig told newspapers from the Funke media group.
"We want to make it a bit easier," she added.
She said the draft bill aimed to give domestic abuse victims clear legal rights against their abusers, including being able to demand that the latter pay any costs arising from the premature termination of the joint lease.
More protection for others in the household
The bill also envisages increased protection for children and relatives of victims.
Under current German law, family courts can impose bans on domestic abusers taking up contact with or approaching their victims but not other members of the same household.
Hubig said the draft law foresaw such protections being extended to other people dependent on the abuser without any separate application being made.
According to police statistics, nearly 266,000 people in Germany were affected by domestic abuse in 2024, 70% of them women and girls.
The Justice Ministry has said the real figure is likely to be much higher, estimating that 95% of cases go unreported.
E-vehicle subsidy program has 'exceeded our expectations' - environment minister
Since May, the German government has paid out subsidies to 100,000 households wanting to procure an electric vehicle, Environment Minister Carsten Schneider told the mass-circulation Bild newspaper on Monday.
Schneider, from junior coalition partner the Social Democrats (SPD), said the program, worth €3 billion ($3.36 billion), had "far exceeded our expectations."
He said that every additional electric vehicle protected households from high fuel prices and made the county less dependent on expensive oil imports and international conflicts.
According to the Bild article, half of households applying for the subsidy had a maximum annual income of €45,000 and three-quarters of them €60,000.
Schneider said he found it particularly important that this graduation of payments according to income functioned properly.
Preliminary assessments have shown that less than 15% of households that applied for the subsidy were looking to buy vehicles from China, contradicting expert views that Chinese automakers would profit the most.
Left Party takes Economy Minister Reiche to top court
The Left Party is taking a row about a remark made by Economy Minister Katherina Reiche to the Constitutional Court after Reiche failed to give a declaration to cease and desist on time.
Reiche had posted a remark on the official Instagram site of her ministry saying: "Antisemitism and expropriation endanger Germany and the economy."
The comment refers first to the unproven accusation that the Left Party is antisemitic in its ideology and then to the Left Party's plan to socialize apartments from corporate landlords in a bid to reduce skyrocketing rents in the capital.
Reiche doubled down on her criticism of the socialist party in comments she made during a visit to Ukraine over the weekend, telling the Sunday edition of the mass-circulation Bild she feared a national loss of growth if a leftist coalition took power in Berlin.
"What the Left Party represents here in Berlin and the people that it represents is dangerous not only for Berlin but for our country," she said.
The Berlin branch of the Left Party has accused the Christian Democrats (CDU), to which Reiche and Chancellor Friedrich Merz belong, of carrying out a "large-scale campaign" against its top candidate, Elif Eralp, who won recent state elections in Berlin.
It has taken legal action over similar statements on CDU interior ministry websites in various states, criticizing the use of official government channels to denigrate another party.
The ministries in Saxony and Schleswig Holstein withdrew the statements, but those in Baden-Württemberg, Brandenburg and Hesse have so far not done so.