Two people were reported dead on Sunday, with at least one person missing, after torrential rain triggered flooding in Spain's northeastern Catalonia region.
Authorities have warned of an "extreme danger" in parts of Barcelona and Girona, with rivers at risk of overflowing and residents in some areas urged to stay indoors.
What do we know about the victims?
One person died when a wall collapsed at a campsite in Tordera, north of Barcelona, while another drowned in a flooded garage in Montornes del Valles, Catalan firefighters said.
Emergency services were also searching for a missing person in Pineda de Mar, about 52 kilometers (32 miles) north of Barcelona.
Catalan regional leader Salvador Illa urged residents to exercise "the greatest caution" and follow instructions from emergency services.
How badly has Catalonia been hit?
More than 100 millimeters (3.9 inches) of rain fell overnight in numerous locations, according to Spain's AEMET weather agency.
Civil protection authorities sent alerts to people living near the Besos River warning of a risk of it bursting its banks. Residents were told to move to upper floors if flooding occurred.
Homes were flooded and vehicles submerged in towns near Barcelona, while local rail services were disrupted.
Emergency crews rescued people trapped in vehicles on flooded streets in Granollers and other communities.
Flights at Barcelona airport were also canceled or delayed, while shops closed early and sporting and cultural events were called off.
What is causing the extreme weather?
The storms are linked to a weather phenomenon known in Spain as a DANA, traditionally called a "gota fria," or "cold drop."
It occurs when cold air high in the atmosphere meets warm, moisture-laden air rising from the Mediterranean, producing intense thunderstorms.
Spain's geography can amplify the effect, as moist air from the Mediterranean is forced upwards by mountain ranges separating the coast from the country's elevated interior.
The latest flooding comes almost two years after catastrophic floods linked to a DANA killed 238 people in eastern Spain, mostly in Valencia, in October 2024.
A study published in 2026 found that human-caused climate change intensified the rainfall during that disaster.
The findings apply only to the 2024 Valencia floods, and a separate analysis would be needed to determine the influence of climate change on the latest flooding in Catalonia.
Edited by: Natalie Muller
If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google so you'll always see our verified news first.