What you need to know
- Berlin has confirmed reports that it is withdrawing its bid to host the Summer Olympics and Paralympics.
- Lawmakers debate whether to introduce an opt-out scheme for organ donation
- The Bundestag will also examine government proposals to grant intelligence agencies a wider scope to counter manifold security threats
- German Foreign Minister Johann Wadephul has warned of Russia's growing aggression against Europe
- The first-ever Islamic theology faculty in Germany opened in Münster
Here is a roundup of the top news stories from and about Germany on Thursday, September 24, 2026:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add DW as a Preferred Source on Google.
Thanks for reading
We'll be back with the latest news out of Germany on Friday. Tschüss!
DW analysis: Jürgen Klopp starts Germany job with shaky Netherlands draw
It looked, until the final moments, as though Germany would somehow hold on and grant Jürgen Klopp a victory in his first game as Germany coach
But the game showed he's going to need more time to achieve them.
Read our full story here.
Germany draws against Netherlands in first match under Jürgen Klopp
Germany and the Netherlands drew 1-1 in the first match under Germany's new coach Jürgen Klopp on Thursday night.
Klopp has been tasked with reversing team's fortunes around after a dismal showing at the FIFA World Cup four months ago.
Germany took an early lead after Felix Nmecha scored the first goal of the match 32 minutes after kickoff.
However, two minutes into overtime, Dutch forward Cody Gakpo neutralized the score. Gakpo had incidentally played under Klopp during their time at Liverpool FC.
Many in Germany had staked high hopes on Klopp's debut with the national team.
Ahead of the match, Klopp told broadcaster RTL: "Today could be the first day of our wonderful future - theoretically."
University of Münster inaugurates faculty of Islamic theology
The University of Münster inaugurated Germany's first-ever faculty of Islamic theology on Thursday evening.
This gives Islam the same status as the university's dedicated Catholic and Protestant faculties of theology.
The new faculty's founding dean, Mouhanad Khorchide, pledged it would pursue an "Islamic theology with and for Europe."
He stressed that the new faculty would be a place of academic inquiry and remain independent.
"A faculty is not a pulpit; preaching takes place in the mosque," Khorchide said.
Gonca Türkeli-Dehnert, North Rhine-Westphalia's State Secretary for Culture and Science, said that "Islamic theology should have a firm place at state-run German universities."
Hundreds of people attended the inauguration on Thursday night, including faith leaders from Christianity and Judaism, as well as international delegates.
The university's rector, Johannes Wessels, said the new Islamic theology faculty would join its Catholic and Protestant counterparts to form a "Theology Campus" which he envisioned as "a hotspot for interfaith discourse."
Rhineland-Palatinate to chair Conference of Minister-Presidents for another year
The German state of Rhineland-Palatinate will retain the chairmanship of the Conference of Minister-Presidents for another year. This decision was made unanimously by the heads of government of the federal states, according to a statement from the State Chancellery in Mainz.
Saxony-Anhalt was due to take over the chairmanship in October. However, following the election victory of the Alternative for Germany (AfD) party in that state, Saxony-Anhalt's premier, Sven Schulze, wrote to his Rhineland-Palatinate's counterpart, Gordon Schnieder (both CDU), on 8 September to inform him of his intention to decline the scheduled chairmanship of the state council beginning in October.
The rest of the rotation of presidencies remains unchanged, according to the statement. This means that Schleswig-Holstein will assume the presidency in October 2027, as originally planned. State legislative elections will be held there in April of next year.
The Conference of Minister Presidents is an informal coordinating body through which the states coordinate with each other and with the federal government. Rhineland-Palatinate has held the presidency since October 2025.
The chair of the Conference significantly influences setting the agenda, preparing for meetings, conducting negotiations, and communicating issues to the public. The chair coordinates and moderates meetings of state leaders.
Far-left German activist Lina E. freed again after refusing to testify
A German woman convicted of attacking far-right activists will be released from detention following a ruling by the Federal Constitutional Court.
A court spokeswoman confirmed that the woman, identified only as Lina E. due to German privacy laws, will be released pending a final decision.
Lina E. was originally sentenced to five years and three months in prison in May 2023 for serious assault and forming a criminal association. She and her accomplices were accused of carrying out several attacks against suspected members of far-right groups in the eastern states of Saxony and Thuringia between 2018 and 2020.
Her conviction sparked outrage among left-wing activists and led to riots in several cities across Germany, most notably in Leipzig.
After serving two-thirds of her sentence, she was released on probation in May in a ruling by the Federal Court of Justice.
However, in June, she was jailed for six months by a Dresden court after refusing to testify in a case involving the far-left Antifa-Ost group.
German Defense Ministry declines comment on reported CIA drone warning
A German Defense Ministry spokesperson declined to comment on media reports that the CIA had warned of potential Russian drone attacks targeting Spain, France and Italy.
Asked by DW what the warning means for Germany, the spokesperson said the ministry generally does not comment on media reports. However, the spokesperson said European Union (EU) and NATO members routinely share intelligence through bilateral channels, EU operations and NATO's integrated air and missile defense framework.
German military units and institutions also contribute on an ongoing basis to creating a shared situational picture, the spokesperson added.
Citing a source close to the Lithuanian Ministry of Defense, Spanish newspaper El Mundo reported that the US intelligence agency has warned Russia is preparing to carry out drone strikes in Europe targeting France, Spain and Italy from the sea.
It comes in the wake of a string of drone incidents near sensitive sites elsewhere in Europe, including Belgium, Germany and Denmark.
IN DEPTH: Could Berlin expropriate large real estate companies?
The socialist Left Party won the Berlin election partly on the promise to implement the city's 2021 expropriation referendum to address the city's rent crisis. But can it really happen?
German business confidence up in September - Ifo
The monthly business climate index put out by the Ifo economic research institute has risen 1.1 points to 89.9 points, the highest level in more than three years.
The index, Germany's most important economic barometer, has been rising constantly over the past five months, indicating that the country is slowly returning to economic health after years of struggle.
The business optimism comes despite an energy price shock that has pushed fuel costs to record highs.
"The German economy continues its recovery," said Ifo president Clemens Fuest.
The gauge of business expectations accompanying the index rose to 90.4 from 89.1 in August, while companies also gave a rosier assessment of their current situation than the month before, improving to 89.5 to 88.5 points.
Ifo said, however, that the automotive sector was still in "difficult terrain."
The index is based on a monthly survey of 9,000 companies.
The news from Ifo comes as the country's five leading economic institutes presented a joint fall forecast raising 2026 GDP growth expectations to 1.3% from 0.6%.
105-year-old suspected Nazi POW guard under investigation
German prosecutors said on Thursday that they were investigating a 105-year-old man over crimes that might have been committed during his alleged time as a guard at a Nazi prisoner-of-war camp during World War II.
In a statement seen by the AFP news agency, they said the man was "thought to have been a guard at the prisoner-of-war camp Stalag 326 VI K" in the Senne region of western Germany.
The man is "accused of being an accessory to multiple murders through his activities there," the statement said.
The Stalag 326 VI K camp held between 180,000 and 200,000 Soviet prisoners of war between 1941 and April 1945, when it was liberated by US troops, according to the memorial at the site.
Some 30,000 Soviet POWs are believed to have died at the camp.
The age of the suspect is a reminder that time is running out to prosecute people who committed crimes as part of Germany's Nazi regime.
In April 2025, for example, an alleged former guard at the Sachsenhausen concentration camp near Berlin died before he could face trial on charges of complicity in the murder of more than 3,300 people.
Berlin officially withdraws Olympics bid
Berlin has confirmed reports that it is withdrawing its bid to host the Summer Olympics and Paralympics.
The decision means that only Munich and the western Rhine/Ruhr region are still in the running as potential hosts, with Hamburg having pulled out in May after failing to win support at a referendum.
The withdrawal comes after the socialist Left Party's victory in Berlin's elections on Sunday. The party's lead candidate and potential mayor, Elif Eralp, said she did not support Berlin's bid.
The current mayor, Kai Wegner of the conservative Christian Democrats (CDU), told reporters: "Today is a sad day for Berlin, because the Olympic and Paralympic Games would have been a tremendous opportunity."
"When Ms. Eralp stated that the bid was effectively off the table ... the leading sports associations made it clear: We cannot give you our approval under these circumstances," he said, adding: "I deeply regret this."
Kaweh Niroomand, the volleyball manager who led the Berlin bid, said, "We simply could not offer the political stability required."
On Saturday, the German Olympic Committee (DOSB) is to choose a preferred region as part of a bid to the International Olympic Committee to host one of the 2036, 2040 and 2044 Summer Games.
The Summer Olympics have been held twice on German soil.
Berlin hosted the Games in 1936 in then Nazi-ruled Germany and Munich, then as part of West Germany, was the site of the 1972 Games.
IN DEPTH: Top economic think tanks raise 2026 GDP growth forecasts
Economic experts predicted on Thursday that German GDP will double to 1.3% this year. They also warned of difficulties ahead.
You can read more about their forecasts for Germany's economic future in the next few years in this article: Germany: Economic institutes double growth forecast for 2026
Planned intelligence reforms trigger heated Bundestag debate
The German parliament has held its first debate on government plans to give intelligence agencies more power as national security is threatened by new dangers at home and from abroad.
Interior Minister Alexander Dobrindt told parliamentarians that the planned reforms would turn Germany's intelligence agencies - the BND (Bundesnachrichtendienst), in charge of international intelligence, and the BfV (Bundesamt für Verfassungschutz), responsible for domestic intelligence - into "true secret services."
He said the agencies would no longer just gather information on threats but be equipped to provide "real defense against dangers, attacks and terror."
Under the plans, the agencies would receive more power to collect, save and automatically evaluate data, as well as permission to react to sabotage or hacking attacks with counterattacks.
Intelligence reforms under fire
Various parliamentarians voiced concerns about the reform's implications in what was sometimes a heated discussion.
Konstantin von Notz from the Green Party said he recognized the need to "update" the powers of the agencies in view of the growing threat from Russia.
But, he said, "the excessive plans for domestic intelligence activities" needed to be trimmed or the the reforms would not survive an appeal to the Constitutional Court.
He said the government needed to take the interests of people professionally entrusted with confidential information much more into consideration, especially psychotherapists.
Clara Bünger of the socialist Left Party accused the government of breaking down the distinction between intelligence agencies and the police that had been a lesson learned "from the crimes of the German fascists."
The far-right politician Gottfried Curio from the Alternative for Germany (AfD) party was strongest in his criticism, saying the government wanted to create a "Stasi 2.0," a reference to the secret service in former communist East Germany.
The reforms would bring about "more than a total surveillance state," he said.
Bundestag set for organ donation debate
The Bundestag will discuss two separate cross-party proposals on Thursday to increase the number of human organs donated for often life-saving transplant operations.
One proposal upholds Germany's current system, under which people who wish to donate organs must actively give permission.
Advocates of the proposal say that the shortfall of donated organs can be remedied by campaigns calling on adults to take part and making it easier to register the desire to donate.
The other proposal calls for an opt-out scheme under which organs can be removed postmortem from anyone who has not expressly rejected being an organ donor.
Backers of this proposal say that although surveys show that most people in Germany are willing to donate their organs, very few actually document this wish.
They also cite statistics showing that countries with opt-out schemes have more donations, with Germany lagging behind in international comparisons.
Altogether 254 of the 630 members of the Bundestag have signed on to the opt-out scheme, and 58 have backed the first proposal to maintain the current national system.
The Bundestag last voted on the issue in 2020, with a majority supporting the opt-in model, even though an opt-out proposal had more signees then, too.
France, Spain and the Netherlands are examples of European countries that have opt-out models in place.
Welcome to our coverage
The DW newsroom in Bonn says guten Tag and willkommen to its readers around the world!
You join our coverage as the German parliament is set to revisit a debate on organ donations: Should an opt-out scheme replace the current opt-in one in view of the dwindling supply?
Parliamentarians will also be looking at goverment proposals to give more powers to the country's intelligence agencies to enable them to cope with the current myriad of security threats.
And the university in Münster is to open a faculty of Islamic theology - the first in the country - that will have an equal status with the Catholic and Protestant faculties there.
All this comes amid a bit of good news for the German economy, which experts say will grow twice as much this year as previously forecast.
Read on for more on these and other stories.