What you need to know
- Senior German politicians are calling for strict penalties and intelligence reform following the Berlin attack
- The suspected Berlin Pride attacker Abdul B. was a known Islamist radical
- Number of unaccompanied minors entering Germany nearly halved last year, German authorities say
- Plastinator Gunther von Hagens, creator of 'Body Worlds' anatomy exhibits, dies at age 81
This blog has now closed. Read below for is a roundup of some of the top headlines from and about Germany on Monday, July 27, 2026.
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Porsche to phase out a further 5,000 jobs by 2035
German luxury carmaker Porsche on Monday announced that it will be cutting a further 5,000 jobs by 2035 as part of its €2.1 billion ($2.4 billion) "Future Package" restructuring program.
The measure comes in an effort to "strengthen the competitiveness of the sports car manufacturer and secure as many jobs as possible in the long term" as sales and profits plummet.
The cuts were agreed to in coordination with Porsche's central works council.
Employment and site protections against compulsory layoffs are in place for workers in the Stuttgart region until 2035 as part of the plan, negotiated with trade union IG Metall and employers' association Südwestmetall.
The restructuring will see employee wage increases deferred until 2035, reduced Christmas bonuses and performance bonuses directly tied to company financial performance.
Some management will see salary increases frozen in 2027 and 2028.
Why is Germany's car industry struggling?
In February 2025, a separate deal set out the elimination of 1,900 jobs in Stuttgart by 2029, as well as the expiration of 2,000 fixed-term contracts.
Porsche has also eliminated jobs at its Leipzig factory and will close three subsidiaries employing 500 workers.
Porsche has cited three major factors for its current crisis: Cratering sales in China, US tariffs and a botched turn to electric vehicles.
The announcement follows similar plans at other companies within the Volkswagen Group, to which Porsche belongs.
Audi says geopolitical uncertainty, US tariffs, Chinese competition will dampen profits
German automobile manufacturer Audi, part of the Volkswagen Group, anticipates lower than expected profits this year.
The company says "geopolitical uncertainty, US tariffs and intense competition, especially in China, are impacting the business," dragging its revenue forecast down to between €58 billion and €63 billion ($66-$72 billion) as compared to a previous estimate between €63 billion and €68 billion.
Audi cited the ongoing conflict in the Middle East as one factor contributing to lower after-tax second quarter profits, which fell 21% to €563 million.
Last week, Volkswagen announced that its overall Q2 profits had fallen by 32%.
Audi Chief Financial Officer Jürgen Rittersberger voiced some optimism though, noting that the introduction of new models and lower production costs could to lead to stronger overall performance in the second half of the year.
One of the drivers of the downward trajectory is the situation in China, where the company has seen a significant slump in sales, much as it has in the US.
Audi's Q1 and Q2 2026 profits in China were four times lower than Q1/Q2 2025.
Parent company VW is currently considering tens of thousands of layoffs in Germany, with Audi's Neckarsulm plant being one of four sites under review.
Still, VW CEO Oliver Blume says the company will seek to avoid plant closures, calling the move a "last option."
Audi has already implemented a job reduction program and announced plans to reduce its workforce by up to 7,500 jobs by 2029.
Protections against compulsory firings remain in effect until the end of 2033, however.
Audi CEO Gernot Döllner said the automaker is a key part of the Volkswagen Group, emphasizing that their "shared goal is a long-term, sustainable roadmap for the future."
READ - Merz finally completes Cabinet reshuffle after transport portfolio delay
German political news has been rather dominated by the aftermath of the CSD attack in Berlin this Monday, but along with all that chatter, Chancellor Friedrich Merz completed the slow-motion reshuffle of his Cabinet.
The main ouststanding change had been an open secret since Thursday. We knew that now-former Transport Minister Patrick Schnieder was for the chop, because he'd said as much in an SMS to colleagues that soon leaked out.
But when his replacement backed out, Schnieder was left hanging, until on Sunday he demanded that Merz dismiss him post-haste, describing the spectacle as "unworthy."
For news on Schnieder's replacement and all the other comings and goings of the reshuffle, catch up on the latest from DW politics correspondent Jens Thurau here.
WATCH: When deradicalization programs don't work
German weather service warns of incoming high temperatures, particularly in west and south
Germany's DWD national weather service is warning of a sharp rise in temperatures as this week progresses.
The south and west is likely to be hit hardest, especially in the short term with quite a lot of cloud coverage still forecast futher north on Tuesday.
Temperatures in the southwest could peak at up to 33 degrees Celsius (91.4 Fahrenheit) on Tuesday, as the hot weather that's caused major wildfires in Spain and France heads east.
By Wednesday and Thursday, sunshine and hotter weather will have reached almost all of the country.
On Thursday, even up on the north coast highs around 31 Celsius are forecast, while temperatures could peak around 39 Celsius in the Upper Rhine region and Bavaria.
The hot weather is however forecast to give way to thunderstorms and lower temperatures relatively quickly, unlike the prolonged and more pronounced heat wave earlier in the summer. However, much of the country is already parched, with water restrictions in place and crops and grassland struggling after several weeks of drier and warmer weather than a more typical summer.
Whale sighted in Wismar Bay once more, soon after 'Timmy' drama
The state Environment Ministry in Mecklenburg Western-Pomerania has reported another whale sighting in Wismar Bay in northern Germany.
This comes a few months after the stranding of a humpback whale nicknamed "Timmy" at the same site, which ended with a contentious attempted rescue in May and then news of the creature's death at sea soon after.
The whale was first sighted at about 9 a.m. near the western harbor of the Wismar Bay and repeatedly observed thereafeter, the ministry said.
"Based on current observations the whale appears healthy. It is regularly diving and resurfacing," the ministry wrote in a press release.
"It's not yet possible to conclusively say what type of whale it is. Its size can also only be estimated, based on first observations the whale is roughly 8 meters (roughly 26 feet) long."
If that size estimate is accurate, the whale would be quite considerably smaller than "Timmy," a young humpback that was more than 12 meters long.
There are shallows in most directions inside the bay, with only a complex route back to open waters available - first headed west-north-west out of the bay, and then turning northeast toward the Baltic Sea.
The ministry said that a police boat was monitoring the situation, trying to prevent any danger for ships or recreational boats. It asked all sailing and water sports enthusiasts to keep well clear and said it would issue more information as soon as it was available.
Germany's Merz mulls stripping of citizenship for terrorists
Following the news that the Berlin attacker was a known religious extremist, German Chancellor Friedrich Merz said law enforcement should do everything in its power to "limit the freedom of movement of such potential offenders as much as possible."
Merz told reporters that he had already asked Germany's Interior Minister, Alexander Dobrindt, to look into the issue.
Police named 21-year-old Abdul B. as the driver of the van that rammed into revelers during a Berlin Pride celebration this Saturday. The man was born in Berlin and - despite his Lebanese roots - only had German citizenship.
Commenting on the case, Merz said that stripping someone of citizenship was not possible if they only had one, like in this case. However, he said that removing the German citizenship of dual nationals was possible even without changing Germany's Basic Law, which effectively operates as the country constitution.
He also said that many people who had been ordered to leave Germany should be indeed pushed into leaving as soon as possible, as the group includes many potentially dangerous individuals.
Germany's Central Council of Muslims condemns the Berlin attack
The umbrella association of Muslim communities in Germany said there was no justification for violence against innocent people after an apparent Islamist attack on the Berlin Pride march on Saturday.
"No one should be subjected to violence on the grounds of their sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, origin or other personal characteristics," the Central Council of Muslims in Germany (ZMD) said in a statement.
"Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims, their families and all those who had to witness this terrible act."
The group also urged a "clear stance against all forms of hatred," warning of extremist ideologies that are "dividing our society and seeking to pit people against one another."
The suspected attacker, Abdul B., is a German national of Lebanese descent. Despite being born into a Shiite family, he sought to join the Sunni "Islamic State" militia in Syria and spent three months in a Lebanese jail before returning to Germany.
The suspect's father told the German Spiegel magazine that the family was "not extremely religious."
Berlin Pride organizers warn against hatred of Muslims
Germany's CSD Association, the organizers of the Berlin Pride event that was cut short by a terror attack on Saturday, pledged not to be suppressed by violence.
The organization said that both "right-wing and religious ideologies aim to oppress queer people."
"Behind such violence lies an attempt to divide our society and pit people against one another," they said in a statement. "We will not allow that to happen."
The group said they condemned "Islamist terrorism clearly and unequivocally," but would oppose attempts to use this attack to incite hate against Muslims.
"Love is stronger than hate," the CSD Association said.
WATCH: What does the Berlin Pride attack mean for city's identity?
DW asked Alfonso Pantisano, Queer Commissioner of the Berlin State Government for the acceptance of sexual and gender diversity, how the LGBTQ+ community was feeling in the wake of the attack.
German Justice Ministry considering reform of juvenile law
As pressure grows on Germany's judiciary and law enforcement following the attack in Berlin, the country's Justice Ministry announced it was planning a study looking into reforming juvenile law.
Under current law, Germany has special legal considerations for persons younger than 21. For the suspects between 18 and 20 years of age, the court has the power to decide whether they should be trialed as adults.
The suspected attacker in Berlin, Abdul B., was reportedly given a suspended sentence and released from detention by a juvenile court this May.
On Monday, the Justice Ministry announced that it would commission a study to examine the need for reform, with preliminary results expected by the end of next year.
A ministry spokesperson noted that the decision was not motivated by Saturday's "shocking isolated incident." Rather, the ministry is responding to "a troubling trend in crimes committed by children and adolescents."
Woman killed in Berlin attack was from Poland, officials say
The person who lost her life in the Berlin attack on Saturday was from Poland, Berlin's Mayor Kai Wegner said on Monday.
Wegner made the comments while addressing a Polish diplomat at the opening of an exhibition on the 1944 Warsaw Uprising in the Berlin City Hall.
"I am deeply moved by what happened on Saturday, and my thoughts are with you and, above all, with the daughter and the family of the murdered woman," the Berlin mayor said, adding that the attack was motivated by "hatred."
Separately, the Polish Foreign Ministry confirmed that the woman killed in Berlin was Polish.
The attack also left 29 people injured.
Merz: Still too early for political consequences
Addressing reporters in Berlin, Chancellor Friedrich Merz said it was still too early to clarify political consequences of the Berlin van ramming.
At the same time, Merz said that his government will look into the attack, which police say was committed by a Berlin-born man who was a known Islamist extremist.
"Most of all, we will have to answer the question: How is it at all possible that a man with this classification here in Berlin could have approached the Christopher Street Day undisturbed and commit this attack?"
German Chancellor Merz pledges to 'protect and defend' freedom
Commenting on the Berlin attack this Saturday, Germany's Chancellor Friedrich Merz said the victims were celebrating "openness, diversity, and freedom" and "were attacked by an Islamist" over those values.
"We will do everything to protect and defend this freedom, openness and liberality," Merz told reporters at a Berlin press conference.
"That is a mission of a government, but also of the society," he added.
What else has happened in Germany today?
We are taking a brief pause from our coverage of the Saturday attack to bring you more stories making headlines in Germany.
Number of unaccompanied minors entering Germany drops by nearly half
A new report indicates a sharp reduction in the number of unaccompanied children and minors crossing Germany's borders.
According to the Federal Statistics Office, the number of minors taken into care after entering Germany dropped from 30.800 to 16.500 in a single year.
This change is also reflected in the overall number of children taken into state care in Germany - the authorities placed around 56,900 children into a foster family or a state facility last year, which is a drop of around 18% compared to 2024. The 2024 numbers had already shown a 7% reduction.
Merz's CDU names new general secretary - report
In the latest step of Chancellor Friedrich Merz's reshuffle, lawmaker Franziska Hoppermann is set to become general secretary of Germany's Christian Democratic Union (CDU).
On Monday, sources told dpa that Merz had proposed Hoppermann, the conservative party's treasurer, at a closed-door meeting in Berlin. She will replace Carsten Linnemann, who is set to take over the Health Ministry.
Hoppermann's appointment is the latest change within Merz's conservative-led government, sparked by the resignation of parliamentary group leader Jens Spahn.
Plastinator Gunther von Hagens dies at age 81
Gunther von Hagens, the physician who invented plastination, has died. On Monday, his family and the Institute for Plastination in Heidelberg announced his passing on Friday at the age of 81.
In the 1970s, von Hagens developed a preservation technique in Heidelberg for turning cadavers into anatomical specimens, which became known worldwide through his "Body Worlds" exhibitions.
He had been suffering from Parkinson's disease for many years.