What you need to know
- The US attacks Iran for the ninth consecutive night since a ceasefire collapsed
- US military says strikes aimed to degrade Tehran's ability to target commercial and civilian shipping in the Strait of Hormuz
- Iranian media report strikes hit northwestern city of Tabriz
This blog is now closed. For the latest on Tuesday, please click here.
Below is a roundup of the main developments from the US-Iran war on July 20, 2026.
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Trump reiterates that Netanyahu will not face arrest in US
US President Donald Trump reiterated on Monday that Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu would not be arrested if he visits the US again in future.
The International Criminal Court issued an arrest warrant for Netanyahu in 2024 on charges of war crimes, which Israel vehemently rejects. Since the US is not a member of the ICC, it has no obligation to carry out such an arrest.
"Benjamin Netanyahu will not be arrested, in any way, shape, or form, while in the United States of America," Trump said on his Truth Social platform.
Trump's post came after New York City Mayor Zohran Mamdani said he was mulling options for a potential arrest should Netanyahu visit the city.
"I believe that Prime Minister Netanyahu belongs in The Hague. He's a war criminal who has been charged by the International Criminal Court," Mamdani told a New York Times in a lengthy interview.
"Whatever the law allows me to do in New York City, that's what we will do," he added.
In response to Mamdani's comments, Netanyahu's office called the arrest warrant "bogus."
"Mamdani appears interested in diverting public attention from his follies and attacking the leader of the Jewish state and the only democracy in the Middle East," the Israeli prime minister's office said in a statement.
Jordan intercepts 3 missiles fired from Iran
Jordan said it shot down missiles fired from Iran on Monday night, with air raid sirens sounding in the capital, Amman.
"The air defense system intercepted and downed tonight three missiles coming from Iranian territory that entered Jordanian airspace and targeted the kingdom's territory," the Royal Jordanian.
The army said the attack "did not lead to any injuries or material damage."
It comes days after an Iranian strike killed two US troops stationed at an air base in Jordan.
Trump says Iran will pay 'many times over' for killing US troops
US President Donald Trump has said that Iran will "pay" for killing American troops.
It comes after the US military on Monday identified two soldiers who were killed in Jordan when an Iranian missile hit their air base. A third soldier remains unaccounted for after the attack.
"Every time Iran kills an American soldier they will pay for that killing many times over!" he said on his Truth Social platform.
"This directive has been passed on to Secretary of War, Pete Hegseth, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Daniel Caine, and every leader in the military."
The official US death toll in the war against Iran currently sits at 17.
France says 2 embassy staff in Tehran were detained
Two French embassy officials in Tehran were detained for several hours on Sunday, France's Foreign Minister Jean-Noel Barrot said on Monday.
In a statement on X, he said both staff members were "detained for several hours without reason, interrogated and one of them was physically abused," before being allowed to return to the embassy.
Barrot called the incident a "flagrant violation of diplomatic immunity".
"I let Iran's foreign minister know that these extremely serious and unacceptable violations of the integrity of our agents could not go without consequences," the French foreign minister said.
Greek shipping firm says two tankers struck off Oman coast
Greek shipping company Dynacom Tankers has confirmed that two of its vessels were struck by projectiles near the Strait of Hormuz on Monday.
It comes after earlier reports of an oil tanker catching fire off the coast of Oman.
Dynacom said the Maltese-flagged tanker Kavomaleas was struck by two projectiles, causing a fire in its engine room and forcing its evacuation.
"After deploying the shipboard fire suppression system, the master made the decision to evacuate the vessel," the company said in a statement.
It said all crew members were located by Oman authorities and transferred to shore.
In a separate statement, Dynacom also said the the Liberian-flagged tanker Acheloos was struck by a projectile on Monday, too.
"All crew members are safe and all accounted for. The vessel has proceeded to anchorage while assessments take place. There are no reports of pollution at this time," the company said.
Earlier on Monday, Iran's Revolutionary Guard said that two "non-compliant oil tankers attempted to enter and exit through what was described as the unsafe and hazardous southern route of the Strait of Hormuz, exploded and were brought to a halt." It did not provide further details about the vessels and it was not immediately clear whether the incidents were related to the Dynacom vessels.
Yemen's Houthis announce maritime blockade of Saudi Arabia
The Iranian-backed Houthis in Yemen have announced a maritime embargo of Saudi Arabia.
Houthi spokesman Yahya Saree declared in a video statement "a maritime embargo against the criminal Saudi enemy, based on the equation of 'an eye for an eye,' effective immediately upon the issuance of this statement."
Saree said the blockade was in response Saudi Arabia's blockade of Houthi "ports and airports" including the targeting of Sanaa airport last week.
"Any foolish act committed by the reckless Saudi enemy through all escalation will be met with a comprehensive and decisive escalation," Saree added.
Last week the Houthis launched missiles at an airport in the Saudi city of Abha, after the government in Yemen struck Sanaa airport in an effort to block a flight from Iran with a Houthi delegation on board.
The Houthis had previously attacked maritime traffic in the Gulf of Aden and Red Sea in response to Israel's offensive in Gaza.
Palestinian militant group Hamas elects new leader
The Palestinian Islamist movement Hamas announced on Monday that it had elected Khalil al-Hayya to head its political bureau.
Al-Hayya led negotiations for Hamas in indirect ceasefire talks with Israel. Last year, he survived an Israeli attack targeting Hamas officials in Doha that ended the life of one of his sons, weeks before Israel and Hamas agreed to a ceasefire in October.
In a statement, the group said that "the Islamic Resistance Movement (Hamas) announces the election of brother mujahid Khalil al-Hayya as head of the movement's political bureau, succeeding the martyred leader Yahya al-Sinwar."
Sinwar was killed in Gaza by Israeli forces in October 2024.
Hamas is designated as a terrorist group in several countries, including Israel and Germany.
Gas prices in US jump above $4 once more
The average price in the US for a gallon of gasoline rose to $4 a gallon (€3.50) again on Monday amid renewed hostilities between the US and Iran, up from $3.14 a gallon one year ago, according to motor club federation AAA.
The average gas price in the US first exceeded $4 a gallon at the end of March, falling in mid-June as crude oil prices dropped after Washington and Tehran reached an interim deal.
People around the world, including in Germany, are seeing higher prices at the pump as a result of the war, which has drastically reduced global oil supply through the virtual closure of the Strait of Hormuz.
As the US and Iran move closer to resuming an all-out war, oil prices have risen again, with Brent crude, the international standard, climbing 3.2% to $90.95 per barrel and benchmark US crude creeping up 2.8% to $84.04 per barrel on Monday.
Diplomatic exchanges with US ongoing despite strikes - Iran
Iran said on Monday that despite the recent hostilities, diplomatic exchanges were still taking place between Tehran and Washington via mediators.
"We have been informed by mediators, we have received messages - without going into details - but the main point is that the diplomatic apparatus has been active in recent days and ideas have been conveyed to us by certain mediators," Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman Esmaeil Baghaei said at a press conference.
At the same press conference, Baghaei responded to a question as to whether the door to diplomacy with the US was now closed by saying that Tehran considered both diplomacy and war as ways of furthering national interests.
"I reject the duality of either war or diplomacy," he said.
"Diplomacy is a tool through which we pursue our national interests, just like war," he added.
Vessel adrift off Oman after projectile hit - UK maritime agency
An unknown projectile has hit a vessel 8 nautical miles (14.8 km) northwest of the village of Kumzar in Oman, leaving it adrift after the crew safely abandoned ship, the United Kingdom Maritime Trade Operations (UKMTO) agency said on Monday.
Earlier, the agency had said the vessel was on fire.
The fire has not been put out, but no environmental impact was reported, the UKMTO said.
The vessel was identified by the British maritime risk management group Vanguard as the Malta-flagged tanker Kavomaleas, operated by operated by Greek shipping firm Dynacom.
Iran's Revolutionary Guards said on Monday that two oil tankers trying to transit the Strait of Hormuz "exploded and were brought to a halt," but it is not clear whether this is connected with the incident reported by the UKTMO.
In recent weeks, Iran has hit tankers sailing a route through the strait that sticks close to the Omani coast in a bid to force vessels to use its own waters and pay for safe passage.
US strikes kill one in northwest, hit nuclear-plant city of Bushehr - state media
Overnight US strikes in northwestern Iran have killed at least one person and wounded several others, Iranian state media reported Monday.
"One person was martyred and several others were injured in a terrorist and aggressive American attack on an area southwest of Tabriz on Monday morning," Majid Farshi, the head of crisis management of East Azerbaijan province, told the state news agency IRNA.
Iranian state media also said that several locations in the southern port city of Bushehr were hit by US strikes.
The city is home to Iran's only civilian nuclear plant.
Bahrain's air defenses intercepting attack from Iran - state TV
Bahrain has come under aerial attack from Iran after missile alert sirens sounded in the island kingdom, with air defenses working to repel the assault, state TV has said.
Journalists from the AFP news agency reported that explosions were heard in the capital, Manama, after the sirens went off.
Bahrain is home to the US Navy's 5th fleet, making it a frequent target for Tehran as it retaliates for recent US strikes on the Islamic Republic.
Ryanair reports war-induced profit drop
Irish low-budget airline Ryanair said on Monday that its net profit fell 34% in its fiscal first quarter under the impact of the Middle East conflict, which has raised jet fuel prices and caused the carrier to reduce the price of fares.
In a statement, the airline said profit after tax dropped to €538 million ($616 million) in the three months to the end of June, down from €820 million a year earlier.
"Operating costs rose 11% to €3.81 billion as the price of our 20% unhedged jet fuel more than doubled" in the first quarter, chief executive Michael O'Leary said in the earnings statement.
Although passenger numbers were up by 6%, this was offset by a 6% reduction in fares.
O'Leary said fares "required stimulation as the Middle East conflict led to consumer hesitancy, concerns about EU jet-fuel shortages, economic uncertainty and later bookings."
He added that Ryanair's net profit for the rest of its financial year "remains highly sensitive to ... conflict escalation in the Middle East and Ukraine, the price of unhedged jet-fuel, macro-economic shocks" and European air traffic control strikes.
Iran strikes Kuwait, missile alert sirens sound in Bahrain
Iran has announced strikes on Kuwait and sirens have gone off in Bahrain to warn of a retaliatory strike after the latest round of US airstrikes on the Islamic Republic.
Iran's Revolutionary Guard on Monday said they hit US military targets in Kuwait and "completely destroyed" an early-warning radar system. They also said they struck an MQ-9 drone hangar at Ali Al Salem Air Base, setting several drones on fire.
In Bahrain, the US Embassy early on Monday warned that "Iran may seek to target unspecified locations in central Manama," the capital, but gave no further details.
Bahrain, a small island kingdom in the Persian Gulf, is home to the US Navy's 5th fleet and has come under attack by Iran several times since the interim deal between Washington and Iran on ending the war has broken down.
US concludes strikes, Trump says Iran again hit 'very hard'
The US military hit Iranian military coastal surveillance and air defense facilities in the ninth round of strikes, US Central Command (CENTCOM) said. The strikes have now been concluded.
The strikes targeted Iranian military command centers, air defense and coastal surveillance sites, maritime capabilities, missile and drone launch sites, and communications networks, CENTCOM said in a post on X.
US President Donald Trump said that the latest strikes against Iran were carried out in response to the deaths of US service members in the region.
"Those great people, those great patriots, were out there fighting that Iran cannot have a nuclear weapon," Trump told reporters after returning from the FIFA World Cup final.
"We hit them very hard again tonight."
Trump said the strikes had been carried out "in honor" of the fallen troops. He also said Iran had suffered heavy military losses in the conflict.
"They've lost everything almost militarily," Trump said.
Trump also claimed the United States controlled the Strait of Hormuz.
"We control the strait. They don't control anything. So we'll see what happens," he said.
However, Iran has refuted that claim, saying a framework agreement reached in mid-June gives Tehran sole responsibility for administering the strategic waterway. That agreement has since fallen apart amid the new hostilities.