Pakistan launched airstrikes overnight on two provinces in neighboring Afghanistan, the two countries said Thursday.
The Taliban government in Kabul said at least nine civilians, all women and children, were killed, while 11 others were wounded.
Pakistani authorities, on the other hand, said the strikes had killed 22 militants. Neither casualty toll could be independently verified.
The airstrikes are the latest clash between the two neighbors since cross-border tensions spiked earlier this year.
What do we know about the latest Pakistani airstrikes on Afghanistan?
The Afghan government spokesman said three civilian homes in the southern province of Helmand and in the eastern province of Kunar, which borders Pakistan, were hit, killing nine and injuring 11 others.
Residents of Helmand told the AFP news agency that three bombs had struck their village, and there is "no military or anything else" in the area.
"We condemn this act and consider this an act of aggression and a crime that violates all universally accepted principles," Zabihullah Mujahid said.
Authorities in Islamabad, however, said that 22 militants had been killed, and that weapons and ammunition had been destroyed.
The airstrikes on militant hideouts were "well planned and calibrated" and were carried out "with precision and accuracy," Pakistan's Ministry of Information said.
"Maximum precautions were taken and it was ensured that no collateral damage occurs," the statement said.
What's behind the conflict between Pakistan and Afghanistan?
The strikes overnight are the third time in the past two weeks that Pakistan has hit targets in Afghanistan.
Simmering tensions since the Taliban seized power in 2021 erupted into open conflict last year.
The two countries held peace talks in April to shore up a March truce, but sporadic flare-ups have continued in the months since.
Islamabad accuses the Taliban government in Kabul of harboring militants who carry out attacks across the border in Pakistan, an allegation Afghanistan denies.
"The threat to Pakistan emanates from Afghanistan," Pakistan's information ministry said. "Our action precisely targeted the terrorist hubs."
Since the conflict escalated last year, Pakistan has closed its border crossings with Afghanistan, which is heavily reliant on foreign food and humanitarian aid.
Last week, the United Nations said more than 1,100 civilians had been killed or injured in Afghanistan as a result of the cross-border conflict this year.
Pakistan insists that it does not target civilians.
Edited by: Elizabeth Schumacher
If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google, so you'll always see our verified news first.