Around 150,000 attended the Mass celebrated by Pope Leo at the shrine of Lourdes during the third day of his four-day visit to France.
The shrine, located near the Spanish border, is venerated by Catholics as a place of healing. Many victims of sexual abuse have also traveled to the site in recent years as they seek to recover from their trauma.
On Sunday, Leo urged respect for life, including for the sick and frail, in what was seen as veiled criticism of euthanasia and abortion.
"Your crutches, your wheelchairs and your hidden tears are not obstacles; instead, they are the very place where you are fully respected and welcomed," Leo said. "Lourdes is blessed as a place for professing the beauty and sanctity of life, for life is welcomed here as a precious gift from God."
Later, the pope also said it was "impossible to regard causing death as something normal."
"What is legal is not necessarily moral," he added, in what could be seen as a reference to France's euthanasia and assisted suicide law which came into effect last month.
"We must reject the temptation to cause death under the guise of false compassion," said the 71-year-old pontiff.
Hundreds of thousands of children abused in France alone
The head of the Catholic Church met with seven adult survivors of sexual abuse - part of the Vatican's decadeslong reckoning with the widespread molestation of children at the hands of the clergy and the steps senior Church figures have taken to cover up the scandal in many countries around the world.
A 2021 report found that around 330,000 children had been abused by Catholic priests and lay leaders between 1950 and 2020 in France.
While not directly referencing the issue during his Mass in Lourdes, the religious leader called for humility among the clergy's ranks.
"The admission of our mistakes is indispensable for our spiritual growth," Leo told the crowd. "In order to heal the deep wounds, infidelities and painful errors that have occurred within (the Church), we must humbly place ourselves under the Lord's purifying gaze."
But some survivors expressed doubt that the pope's visit would lead to quick changes within the church.
"Things are moving very slowly," Michele Le Reun-Gaigne, a co-leader of a French survivors' association, told the Reuters news agency. "It isn't going to happen overnight."
Pope urges 'vigilance' while meeting bishops
Earlier on Sunday, the pope met with French bishops and praised their "courageous" response to "the painful scourge of abuse committed against minors by members of the clergy or in an ecclesial context."
He thanked the bishops for "listening, the search for truth, justice, forgiveness and making amends" and praised their "firm commitment to a culture of prevention and protection against these crimes."
"You must continue along the path you have begun, maintaining the greatest vigilance," the US-born pope said, according to the readout provided by the Vatican.
Pope calls on Europe to help end cycle of 'lies and deceit'
On Monday, speaking in the city of Metz on the last day of his French visit, the pope warned of what he called "increasingly uncivilized" intra-national relations and people boasting about their "lies and deceit."
He called on Europe to "help to break this cycle through the respect for others that it has learned to cultivate and preserve."
The pope's visit to Metz, near the border with Luxembourg and Germany, was to honor Robert Schuman, a French Catholic statesman regarded as one of the founding fathers of European unity.
The US-born pontiff's remarks are in stark contrast with views on Europe voiced by many in the current Trump administration and will be seen by many as an implicit criticism of its political practice.
Edited by: Sean Sinico, Wesley Dockery, and Elizabeth Schumacher
If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google so you'll always see our verified news first.