At least nine people died and 23 were injured after Russia struck Ukraine's capital city Kyiv with ballistic missiles overnight, Ukraine's State Emergency Service said on Saturday morning.
The missiles struck several homes and a five-storey residential building, while cars were also set alight.
What else do we know about the damage from the attack?
Four children were among the 23 injured, the emergency service said.
In a post on his Telegram account, Kyiv Mayor Vitaly Klitschko said that several people were trapped in a damaged residential building during the attack.
The first and second floors of the building had partially collapsed, he said, while some warehouses in the city were also on fire.
Zelenskyy stresses need for defense systems
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said Russia launched 35 missiles overnight, including 27 ballistic missiles, as well as 185 attack drones. He said only one ballistic missile was intercepted, blaming a shortage of interceptors for Ukraine's Patriot air defense systems.
"As usual, the Russians struck ordinary residential buildings," Zelenskyy said, adding that 18 residential buildings, a school, the Lithuanian Embassy and infrastructure facilities were damaged.
"Every package of ballistic missile interceptors saves the lives of our people," he said. "And every night without them results in more casualties."
The attacks come as Moscow has intensified its bombing campaigns in recent weeks and months.
Last week,Zelenskyy met with his US counterpart Donald Trump and the UK's new Prime Minister Andy Burnham as he seeks increased support to boost Ukraine's air defences.
Kyiv hits back against shipping and oil infrastructure
Zelenskyy later said Ukrainian forces had responded with strikes on targets inside Russia and in the Black Sea region.
"Grateful to Ukrainian warriors who are bringing the war back to Russia and responding to its attacks against life," he said, adding that Ukraine was targeting "facilities that sustain the war effort."
He said Ukrainian forces had sunk the sanctioned Russian container ship Yanina and struck infrastructure at three oil refineries in Russia's Bashkortostan region, nearly 1,600 kilometers (994 miles) from Ukraine. Independent reporting confirms Zelenskyy announced both sets of strikes on Saturday.
"We continue applying our just pressure," Zelenskyy said. "Our long-range sanctions plan is being implemented step by step."
Subsequently, Russia's Defence Ministry said Moscow's forces had struck a fuel storage facility and oil refinery in the Ukrainian port city of Odesa.
The ministry said a vessel south of the port was also hit delivering supplies for the Ukrainian military.
Edited by: Dmytro Hubenko, Saim Dušan Inayatullah
Don't let the algorithm hide the news. If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google by clicking here and hitting the "star" or "preferred" button, so you'll always see our verified news first.