What you need to know
- A massive wildfire in Belgium has stopped its advance to the German border, firefighters say
- Reduced cargo shipping on rivers amid low water levels could impact construction supplies, associations say
- New statistics show one in 10 young people are not in work or training
This live blog has now been closed. Read on for a roundup of top headlines from and about Germany on August 17, 2026:
Don't let the algorithm hide the news. If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google so you'll always see our verified news first.
WATCH: Belgium's largest wildfire on record remains out of control
Belgium's largest wildfire in a century hasn't been brought under control despite cooler weather and rain.
Firefighters say limited rainfall has increased smoke, reducing visibility and making it harder to detect flames burning deep in peat soil.
Because of the blaze's size and difficult terrain, aerial firefighting remains crucial.
Belgium has activated the EU Civil Protection Mechanism and is receiving support from several European countries.
The fire is also threatening the German border and the medieval town of Monschau, where precautionary evacuations have been ordered due to smoke risks.
Fuel prices creep back toward 2026 highs, with Iran still tense and river deliveries failing
Prices for diesel and petroleum at German filling stations, particularly gasoline, are nearing the highest levels of the year, even though oil prices are well adrift of their highest levels amid the war in the Gulf.
Sunday's daily average for E10 gasoline, the cheapest variant, was €2.161 per liter around the country. That equates to $9.47 per US gallon. That was a rise of almost 7 cents compared to the previous Sunday.
Diesel, meanwhile, climbed by just over 8 cents last week, reaching a national average of €2.243 per liter, or $9.83 per US gallon.
Since Friday, these quite elevated levels have been more or less stable.
The main motoring club the ADAC still attributes the prices in large part to strains on oil prices, even though costs are far adrift of the highs seen between March and May.
Another factor is that the German government's special two-month tax rebate expired at the beginning of July without extension, and prices have crept back up ever since.
And finally, the low river levels are causing disruptions, particularly at a regional level, to some fuel transportation systems. The Rhine, in particular, is a commonly used delivery method for fuel that is currently either entirely unavailable or forcing barges to run well below their freight capacity.
Gasoline prices are currently much nearer their 2026 highs than diesel, which is still quite a lot cheaper than at the high points of March and April.
Belgium's King Philippe visits border blaze
Belgium's King Philippe cut short his summer vacation to survey efforts to combat the wildfire in the High Fens (Hautes Fagnes) nature reserve near the German border on Monday.
Philippe called it a "difficult moment for all of Belgium," and voiced hope that "this tragedy will quickly be behind us."
The king was briefed by local emergency services and also by a contingent of local, regional and national politicians already at the scene, including the head of Wallonia's government Adrien Dolimon, Interior Minister Bernard Quintin and Deputy Prime Minister Jan Jambon.
Philippe was set to visit some of the worst-hit communities like Sourbrodt and Waimes, after first arriving at the local disaster management response center in Vottem earlier in the day.
Germany: Bundeswehr troop numbers reach 13-year high
Germany's Bundeswehr military employed roughly 186,700 soldiers as of July 31 this year, the Defense Ministry said on Monday.
The increase is a relatively rare positive headline as Germany and its military try to ramp up recruitment, procurement and defense spending - to meet new NATO targets, appease the Donald Trump administration, and respond to perceived threats from Russia and beyond - encountering a string of setbacks and bottlenecks along the way.
By the mid-2030s, Germany aims to recruit some 70,000 more full-time troops than it currently has on retainer, to reach a full-time force of around 260,000 plus around 200,000 reservists.
Read our full report on Geramny's latest troop figures here.
Madison Air spends €5.1 billion on German cooling company ebm-papst
US company Madison Air Solutions is spending $5.4 billion or roughly €5.1 billion to buy out German family-owned ventilation company ebm-papst.
The companies' bosses argued the move was a way to "make one plus one equal three," as ebm-papst chief executive Klaus Geissdörfer put it. He said Madison Air knew how to help the German company realize its plans to expand.
"We will also benefit from better access to the US market," Geissdörfer said, noting that, in turn, his company could provide Madison Air Solutions with better access to new markets in Europe and Asia. "Ebm-papst is well positioned here. That's why we complement each other very well."
The US market for cooling and ventilation solutions is booming in no small part thanks to the race to make data centers. The vast processors in these facilities create large amounts of heat and require constant cooling.
And in Germany, a particularly hot summer has brought questions on more widespread use of air conditioning back to the fore.
Madison Air's chief executive Jilly Wyant said that as a longstanding customer of ebm-papst, "we have a deep appreciation for its integrated airflow technology and custom engineering expertise."
She said the new duo was "confident we can accelerate growth, enhance performance and create significant long-term value for shareholders.
The deal still requires regulatory approval before it can go ahead.
Mixed forests needed to lessen wildfire risk - Forestry Council
The head of the German Forestry Council has said Germany should urgently convert its conifer forests into mixed forests in the face of the growing wildfire threat as climate change advances.
Christian Haase told the public broadcaster Deutschlandfunk that the increased fire danger "means for us as forest owners: forest conversion, forest conversion, forest conversion."
"We must move away from pure conifer stands towards mixed forests," he said.
However, he conceded that the shift would take some time.
"This will certainly take another decade," he said.
Studies suggest that monocultural forests are more frequently affected and more severely affected by fires.
Pine forests in particular are considered highly flammable as their trees are rich in resins and oils.
Germany has seen several recent wildfires, including one in Hürtgen Forest that was the worst in the recorded history of the western state of North Rhine-Westphalia.
People in Germany taking more domestic trips
In 2025, people in Germany cut the number of trips they took abroad, while the number of trips taken within the country with at least one overnight stay rose, figures from the Federal Statistical Office (Destatis) showed on Monday.
The number of trips within Germany climbed by 3.9% in comparison with 2024 to 169 million, Destatis said.
Foreign travel went down by around 8.3% in comparison with the year before, to 105 million.
The most popular destination was Italy, followed by Austria, Spain, France and the Netherlands.
For all trips, the most popular means of transport was the car (60.2%), with rail (19.2%) and plane (15.2%) lagging well behind.
Growing number of young people not in work or training
The number of 20 to 24-year-olds in Germany who were neither employed nor doing training or studies rose to 10% in 2025 as part of a continuing trend, new figures have shown.
In 2022, the figure was 8.8%, the Federal Statistical Office said, using international comparative data from the European statistics authority Eurostat.
However, the figure from Germany is relatively low among all 27 EU nations and below the average of 12.9% for the bloc.
The Netherlands had the lowest percentage of people in the 20-24 age group who were unemployed or not doing some professional training, at 5.6%.
The figure was highest in Romania (22.8%), Bulgaria (17.3%) and France (16.2%).
Young people in rural areas of Germany were less likely than those in big cities to fall into the category (7.9% and 10.6% respectively).
Low water levels in rivers could impact construction: industry associations
The building sector could face supply shortfalls as ships on German rivers carry less cargo because of falling water levels, construction industry associations say.
"Transport by water is becoming increasingly difficult," Thomas Reimann, the president of an association representing construction contractors in the German state of Hesse, told the DPA news agency.
He said that sand and gravel, which are often shipped in large quantities to concrete plants, are becoming harder to come by and more expensive.
The German Construction Industry Federation (HDB) also said suppliers had already warned that continued low water levels could lead to shortages in some building supplies.
Bitumen, aggregate, natural stone, fuels and mineral construction waste are among the other materials affected by the reduced shipping capacity.
HDB chief executive Tim-Oliver Müller said it was unlikely that construction would be brought to a widespread halt but that the risk of shortages, higher logistics costs and delays was growing as low water levels persist.
Precautionary evacuations in Monschau as Belgium fire rages
Several homes in the Eifel town of Monschau were evacuated overnight as a wildfire burning in Belgium's High Fens nature reserve threatened to cross the border.
Around 30 residents from 17 homes were evacuated, with emergency accommodation set up at a nearby school.
However, by Monday morning the fire was said to have stopped its advance toward Germany amid weather conditions that are more favorable to firefighting efforts.
The fire had previously moved to within about 300 meters (984 feet) of the German border.
A spokesman for the local fire brigade said meadows between the fire and homes had been soaked with water for hours to help stop the spread of the flames.
Welcome to our coverage
The DW newsroom in Bonn wishes guten Tag to its readers at the start of a new week.
Although the recent (very) hot weather in Germany seems to be over for now, the wildfire risk remains high, as is shown by the massive blaze in neighboring Belgium.
Some streets in the border town of Monschau were evacuated late on Sunday as the flames threatened to enter German territory, but they have fortunately been successfully held back for now.
The persistent dry conditions continued to pose problems to cargo shipping on the Rhine and other rivers, with construction associations saying that supplies could be delayed and are becoming more expensive.
Read on here for more on these and other stories from Europe's largest economy.