What you need to know
- Activist Sonam Wangchuk is continuing his hunger strike from hospital
- CJP announced strict non-violence during the July 20 march
- Dipke says to call for Modi's resignation, announces indefinite hunger strike
- Sonam Wangchuk was shifted to a hospital by the police on the 21st day of his hunger strike
- Wangchuk has been fasting since June 28 in solidarity with students demanding the resignation of Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan
This blog is now closed. Below is a roundup of the latest news from India for the weekend of Saturday, July 18 and Sunday, July 19:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Thanks for following our coverage
That's all from us on the weekend.
Come back for more news from India tomorrow (Monday, July 20).
What else is making headlines in India?
Rahul Gandhi calls Modi's silence on Ram Temple donation theft 'unacceptable'
Congress leader Rahul Gandhi on Saturday wrote to Prime Minister Narendra Modi that his silence over alleged financial irregularities involving donations to the Ram Temple in Ayodhya was "unacceptable."
Along with Congress party president Mallikarjun Kharge, Gandhi, in a letter to Modi, asked the PM to order an independent investigation into the theft of donations.
"The credibility of your government and the Trust rests on how transparently and swiftly you act," the letter said. "The people of India are watching."
Opposition parties walk out of all-party meeting
The opposition parties briefly walked out of an all-party meeting on Sunday to protest the government's decision to invite the Nationalist Citizens Party of India (NCPI), a group that includes 20 MPs who broke away from the Trinamool Congress (TMC).
The opposition objected to the invitation as a decision on the status of the rebel MPs remains pending with the Lok Sabha Speaker.
The parties later returned to the meeting after staging the symbolic walkout.
Madhya Pradesh approves Uniform Civil Code
The central Madhya Pradesh state on Sunday approved the Uniform Civil Code (UCC) with the government saying the law will ensure equal rights regarding marriage, property, live-in relationships and religious freedom.
According to the law:
- only one marriage is allowed while a spouse is alive
- divorce is filed through legal process
- minimum age for marriage is 21 years for men and 18 years for women
- all marriages must be registered with government authorities
- all live-in relationships must be registered with the authorities within one month
- a married man in a live-in relationship with another woman will face up to five years in prison
- sons and daughters will now have equal rights in matters of property and inheritance
Tribal groups will remain outside the purview of the law.
PV Sindhu becomes first Indian to win Japan Open title
Badminton star PV Sindhu won the Japan Open women's singles titles on Sunday, becoming the first Indian to claim the title.
She beat Japan's Akane Yamaguchi 21-17, 21-17 in Tokyo to win the competition.
"This is what I fight for. The flag. My country," Sindhu posted on social media after her win.
Delhi court refuses Wangchuk's transfer to private hospital
The Delhi High Court on Sunday refused to allow activist Sonam Wangchuk to be shifted to a private hospital following an urgent plea by his wife, Gitanjali Angmo.
The court said the authorities were right to move Wangchuk to a government hospital because he had not admitted himself despite his deteriorating health.
The court sought a status report on Wangchuk's health within three days and scheduled the next hearing for July 24.
A government lawyer told the court that Wangchuk was taken to Safdarjung Hospital on the 21st day of his hunger strike after his condition deteriorated.
Angmo had sought permission to move her husband to a hospital of the family's choice, saying she had lost faith in his current treatment.
Police break up protest in Madhya Pradesh
In news of other protests in India, in the central Madhya Pradesh state on Sunday the police cleared the site of a 15-day protest and sent demonstrators back to their villages, media reports said.
The villagers were protesting a planned project to transfer water from the Ken River to the Betwa River and other development projects in Madhya Pradesh's Chhatarpur district.
The protest, led largely by tribal women, began on July 3 with demonstrators alleging irregularities in land acquisition, rehabilitation, environmental safeguards and project implementation.
According to the Times of India newspaper, protest leader Divya Ahirwar alleged that police arrived early Sunday and detained activist Amit Bhatnagar, who had been on hunger strike for 11 days, along with several protesters.
Elsewhere in the northern Uttarakhand state, the government relented and suspended the felling of more than 4,000 trees for a road widening project in Dehradun city after massive public protests.
Police says CJP Parliament march not approved: report
The Delhi Police said on Sunday that the Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) protesters had neither obtained permission to continue their demonstration at Jantar Mantar nor sought approval for the planned march on Monday, according to the Indian Express newspaper.
The CJP is planning a march to Parliament on July 20 in protest of student deaths due to suicide over exam irregularities. The protesters are calling for Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan to step down.
However, according to police, the march cannot be allowed as prohibitory orders are in force around Parliament due to the start of the Monsoon Session, the report said.
CJP founder Abhijeet Dipke and activist Sonam Wangchuk have called on supporters to march to Parliament on Monday, the first day of the Monsoon Session.
CJP claims 'infiltrators' plotting to disrupt protest
The Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) on Sunday claimed that 30-40 people linked to Prime Minister Narendra Modi's nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Delhi Police had infiltrated its protest and planned to make provocative statements to disrupt the demonstration.
In a post on X, the group urged protesters to identify these "goons" and distance themselves from such individuals, saying they were not supporters of CJP or activist Sonam Wangchuk.
CJP also said a heavy police and Rapid Action Force (RAF) presence was building up at the protest site, with multiple police vehicles and detention buses deployed in the area.
It claimed tear gas launchers had also been readied at the scene.
Wangchuk's wife moves court to shift activist to another hospital
Gitanjali Angmo, the wife of Indian activist Sonam Wangchuk, said on Sunday that she has approached the Delhi High Court for an urgent hearing seeking permission to move her husband to a hospital of the family's choice.
Earlier, she said she had lost faith in the hospital where her husband is being treated and warned that the hospital and the government would be responsible if anything happened to the activist.
"Despite repeated requests, the hospital has refused to discharge him or allow us to shift him to a private hospital of our choice," she wrote on X.
"With around 30 police personnel stationed on our floor and well over 100 across the hospital, our movement is severely restricted. It is not medical care. It is illegal detention."
Angmo alleged the hospital told the family that Wangchuk's potassium level had fallen to a life-threatening 2.9 but did not disclose the figure in its public health bulletin. She said an independent test put the level at 3.5, which she described as normal.
Wangchuk calls for 'India's second freedom movement' on Monday
Indian activist Sonam Wangchuk who is continuing his hunger strike from hospital, where he was forcibly shifted, urged people to attend the July 20 march to Parliament, calling it "India's second freedom movement."
On Saturday, Wangchuk was moved to a hospital by the Delhi Police on the 21st day of his hunger strike in New Delhi ahead of a planned march on Monday.
The police said that Wangchuk was shifted to a hospital from his protest site on orders of the court and on medical grounds.
Wangchuk, 59, has been fasting since June 28 in solidarity with supporters of the Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) who are protesting an entrance exam scandal and demanding the resignation of Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan.
Among the rules for the march posted by CJP on X was a strict prohibition on violence under any circumstances: "No matter the provocation, we will not raise our hands."
Incidentally, one of the defining moments of India's independence movement was Mahatma Gandhi's 24-day Dandi March in 1930, which challenged the British monopoly on salt.
WATCH: Cockroach party supporter Sonam Wangchuk hospitalized
Delhi Police forcibly moved Indian activist Sonam Wangchuk to hospital on the 21st day his hunger strike. Authorities said there had been a "much-needed medical intervention," but the founder of the Cockroach Janta Party says he was "kidnapped."
Welcome back!
Hello! This is Shakeel from DW's New Delhi Studio welcoming you back to our coverage of the top stories in India.
On this cloudy Sunday morning we are following the updates from the Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) protest at Jantar Mantar.
Meanwhile, leader of the opposition in Parliament, Rahul Gandhi, wrote to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, calling his silence over the theft of donations from the Ayodhya temple as "unacceptable."
For all this and more - stay tuned to our blog!
We're pausing our coverage
We're pausing our news blog coverage of India for today.
Thank you for reading and stay tuned for more tomorrow!
Opposition leaders speak in solidarity with Sonam Wangchuk, Modi silent
Political leaders across the spectrum spoke in solidarity with Sonam Wangchuk on Saturday after Delhi Police forcibly transferred him to a hospital on the 21st of his hunger strike demanding accountability from the government.
- Congress party leader Rahul Gandhi said it was "wrong" to remove Wangchuk while he on a non-violent hunger strike. Gandhi also highlighted paper leaks, the rising cost of education, and student suicides in a post on X, the issues Wangchuk is on hunger strike against.
- Congress party President Mallikarjun Kharge called Wangchuk's removal "yet another black stain on democracy and the Constitution."
- Trinamool Congress (TMC) party head Mamata Banerjee posted on X saying public trust can't be earned by "suppressing peaceful protests or refusing dialogue."
- TMC parliamentarian Mahua Moitra said Wangchuk's removal ahead of the July 20 march to Parliament and changing of the Delhi police chief highlighted the government's fear. "Education minister must go!" she said.
- Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) Anish Gawande said, "His own wife is not allowed to meet him at Safdarjung Hospital without a phone. No warrant has been produced for his arrest. This is illegal detention, plain and simple."
- Aam Aadmi Party leader and former Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal posted a video on social media calling people to "unite and take to the streets." "Only then will something change in this country," he said.
- Aam Aadmi Party leader and former Delhi Chief Minister Atishi called the incident "Shocking and shameful!"
- Member of Parliament and Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad posted on X saying, "Democracy is once again disgraced!"
Neither Prime Minister Narendra Modi nor Union Home Minister Amit Shah have released a statement on the incident.
IMAGES: Scenes from Jantar Mantar after Sonam Wangchuk's removal
Here is a collection of photos from the Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) protest at Jantar Mantar on Saturday:
Three people launch indefinite hunger strike after Soman Wangchuk 'brutally' moved
DW spoke to three people who said they began an indefinite hunger strike on Saturday.
Two of them, who had travelled from Rajasthan, said they started fasting Saturday morning in protest over activist Sonam Wangchuk being taken to the hospital.
Bharat Bhushan, who identified himself as a student, said he had recently joined the protest.
Tezveer, who was seated surrounded by posters, said he had witnessed police taking Wangchuk away. "The police took him away brutally," he said.
The third protester, Yash Mishra, said he had been on a hunger strike from the first day of the protest but stopped after falling ill. He returned on 16 July and resumed the hunger strike for one day. From Saturday on, he said, he would continue his hunger strike "until death."
Sonam Wangchuk to continue hunger strike from hospital
The Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) announced on Saturday that activist Sonam Wangchuk will continue his hunger strike from the hospital.
Wangchuk, who began the 21st day of his hunger strike in the national capital on Saturday, was picked up by police and transferred to a hospital from the protest site.
In a post on X, CJP said that Wangchuk "will continue his fight from the hospital."
CJP asked people to pray for the 59-year-old activist.