Prince Harry and his wife Meghan are moving back to the United Kingdom more than six years after they stepped down from their royal duties and shifted base to the United States, British press reported late Wednesday.
According to The Telegraph, the Duke and Duchess of Sussex are planning to go to the UK within weeks and settle in a private, non-royal house reportedly outside London.
Several news agencies later confirmed the reports.
The couple's children Prince Archie (7) and Princess Lilibet (5) have already enrolled in a British school and will begin classes from September, the BBC and several other news outlets said in their reports.,
There is yet to be an official statement from Harry or Buckingham Palace, which historically refrains from commenting on speculation about non-working members of the royal family.
Fairytale union to bitter split from royal family
Harry (41) - who is the youngest son of King Charles III and Diana, Princess of Wales - married former US actress Meghan Markle (45) in 2018 amid a media frenzy.
At the time, Harry's marriage to Meghan, who is biracial, was seen as a sign of progress within the British royal family.
However, what followed was constant friction with the monarchy, amid deep media scrutiny, which culminated into
The couple moved to California after stepping down from their duties as working royals in 2020.
The growing rift with the royal family only worsened after Harry published his memoir "Spare".
Harry and Meghan have frequently criticized the monarchy and the royal family, including in a series of TV interviews and a Netflix documentary.
They said they left Britain to escape the restrictions of royal life. The couple has also called out palace officials for being insensitive to Meghan's mental health.
In an interview with Oprah Winfrey, Meghan accused an unnamed member of the royal family of raising concerns about how dark the color of her son Archie's skin would be when she was pregnant with him.
Will Harry and Meghan's surprise move usher royal reconciliation?
Harry's relationship with his father King Charles III and his elder brother and heir-to-the-throne Prince William saw a total breakdown in the aftermath of the couple's exit. It is understood that the royal brothers are effectively estranged.
Last year, Harry said he wanted to reconcile with his father, who is undergoing treatment for cancer.
Harry and Meghan made a brief trip to the UK in early July with their two children, during which they had a private meeting with King Charles.
It was the first time Archie and Lilibet met their grandfather since the 2022 platinum jubilee of late Queen Elizabeth II.
British media reports that King Charles only became aware of Harry's plans to move back to the UK on Sunday.
Edited by: Rana Taha
If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your preferred source on Google, so you'll always see our verified news first.