FIFA warned against what it calls a "concerted and ongoing effort" to "undermine" the organization and its president, Gianni Infantino.
The statement, issued late on Saturday, comes amid a growing dispute over Infantino's leadership after the failed plan to create a subsidiary to run the men's World Cup and other events, with up to a 20% stake offered to external investors.
The proposal drew criticism from European governing body UEFA, which threatened to boycott future World Cups, as well as several national associations and senior FIFA officials, and prompted calls for Infantino to resign.
Amid the growing criticism Infantino persuaded FIFA's Board of Management to express its full support for him at a crisis meeting in Rabat, Morocco, on Wednesday.
Report raises new questions over Infantino
The pressure on Infantino intensified on Friday when British newspaper the Daily Telegraph reported a six-figure sum was paid to a female employee alleged to have been in a relationship with him during his time as UEFA general secretary.
UEFA confirmed a departure payment and said it also funded her MBA course, stating both were in line with regulations at the time.
A FIFA spokesman told the Telegraph on Friday: "FIFA president Gianni Infantino strongly denies these allegations, and they are categorically untrue."
Responding to the latest scrutiny, FIFA said on Saturday, without directly mentioning the Telegraph report, "recent reporting has included unsubstantiated assertions and demonstrably false claims concerning FIFA and its President."
Investment plan dispute deepens leadership crisis
The fallout over the shelved private investment plan has overshadowed Infantino's bid for a fourth term as FIFA president.
After this week's crisis meeting, UEFA said it no longer has confidence in him, and Norwegian FA President Lise Klaveness called for his resignation.
Despite the controversy, Infantino retains strong backing among FIFA members, with the Confederation of African Football (CAF) unanimously supporting his leadership and South American governing body CONMEBOL opposing any attempt to remove him without a vote of all member associations.
FIFA said that those who lacked the support of its member associations should not seek to achieve "allegation, insinuation or misinformation what they cannot achieve through FIFA's established democratic processes."
Edited by: Emmy Sasipornkarn
Don't let the algorithm hide the news. If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google, so you'll always see our verified news first.