Two people were killed in a Ukrainian drone attack on the Moscow region, local authorities said Sunday, with an oil refinery in the region also being hit.
Energy infrastructure has been repeatedly targeted by both Ukraine and Russia, despite US President Donald Trump saying both sides had agreed to stop.
Ukraine's repeated targeting of oil refineries has led to oil product shortages and fuel price increases in Russia.
Ukraine President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said the strike had "a very significant impact," saying the oil in the hit refinery funds "billions of dollars to sustain the war machine."
"Moscow must end its brutal war and choose peace instead of building layered rings of air defense at the expense of other regions," Zelenskyy posted on X.
According to Moscow Mayor Sergey Sobyanin, more than 1,600 drones have been intercepted by Russia since Saturday, including 450 aimed at the Russian capital, making it one the largest Ukrainian drone attacks on the city since Russia launched its full-scale invasion in 2022.
Moscow mayor accuses Ukraine of trying to disrupt parliamentary election
Sobyanin said that numerous drones had made it to the oil refinery, and another one hit an apartment. The scale of the damage done to the refinery has not been confirmed.
This comes as Russia is entering the last day of its three-day parliamentary election.
Sobyanin said the "unprecedented attack was clearly planned with the aim of disrupting the elections."
Meanwhile, in the eastern Ukrainian, Russian-occupied region of Kherson, a drone attack on a bus had killed two people, including an election official, Russian state news agency RIA reported.
Three children killed in Kyiv region
In Ukraine, four people were killed in a Russian drone attack in the Kyiv region, local authorities said.
Among the casualties are a mother and her two 3-year-old children, as well as a girl who was taken to hospital in another district and later died.
The southwestern Fastiv district suffered damage to homes and industrial buildings.
Russia's Defense Ministry said a warehouse of drone and missile maker Fire Point was struck in the Kyiv region. It also hit a cargo vessel and a postal logistics center in the Odesa region, saying both were used for military shipments.
Russia has been repeatedly carrying out drone attacks on the Ukrainian capital in recent weeks.
Edited by: Karl Sexton
If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google by clicking here and hitting the "star" or "preferred" button, so you'll always see our verified news first.