What you need to know
- At least 9 dead, several injured in hotel fire in central Kolkata
- Authorities fear death toll could rise, rescue operation continues
This blog is now closed. Below is a roundup of the biggest headlines from India on Wednesday, August 19:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
IndiGo airline platform issues disrupt bookings
India's largest airline IndiGo on Wednesday said it was facing technical issues with its core reservation platform, as customers complained of disruptions.
The airline controls more than 65% of India's domestic aviation market.
In a post on X, one user complained that he had been unable to complete the web check-in on the company's app and Website while a customer case executive was also unable to assist due to the same issues.
"Our teams are working on priority, with our partner, to fix the issue as soon as possible," the airline said on X.
"Customers requiring immediate travel assistance may reach out to our contact center for support. Those customers who have a later travel are advised to try accessing the website or app again after some time," it said.
The same message was displayed on the company's website even as of an hour after it was posted on X.
WATCH: Is China's rise reshaping South Asia and what does that mean for India?
China is building influence across South Asia - through ports, military ties, and billions in investment. From Pakistan to Bangladesh to Sri Lanka, Beijing's footprint keeps growing in India's neighborhood.
Can India keep up, or is the balance of power already shifting?
PM Modi says 'heartbroken' over loss of life in Kolkata fire
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi expressed condolences to the families of the nine people killed in a building fire in central Kolkata, on Wednesday.
"I am deeply heartbroken to hear the news of loss of life in the fire in Kolkata," he said on social media "May the injured recover swiftly," he added.
Those dead include two women and a four-year-old child, the Press Trust of India reported.
Kolkata is the capital of the eastern state of West Bengal. Once the capital of British India, several northern and central neighborhoods of the old city contain close-quartered buildings, old wiring, undermaintained and at times illegal infrastructure.
West Bengal Chief Minister blames 'previous regime'
State Chief Minister Suvendu Adhikari also took to social media to blame the previous government for the tragedy.
Adhikari, a member of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party, took oath as West Bengal's chief minister in May after the party won its first ever election in the state.
"This tragedy is a grim reminder of the legacy of negligence left behind by the previous regime," he said, adding that the city and state's infrastructure had been allowed to grow unchecked for years.
"We are now working tirelessly to undo the damage of that era and to enforce the safety standards that should have been in place all along," he said.
Adhikari further said a five-member Special Investigation Team (SIT) had been formed to conduct a "comprehensive inquiry" into this incident.
IN DEPTH: Should India be worried about the Mecca defense pact?
The Mecca Joint Defense Agreement signed by Saudi Arabia, Turkey and Pakistan on August 7, comes amid the Iran war and shifting security arrangements in the Middle East.
Saudi Arabia is seeking additional security partnerships as it faces uncertainty over the reliability of the US security umbrella. Turkey is seeking a larger regional role, while Pakistan is looking to turn its longstanding military relationship with Riyadh into wider strategic influence.
The agreement calls for collective defense, stating an armed attack on one member will be regarded as an attack on all three.
It also formalizes relationships that already exist. Pakistan has trained and assisted Saudi forces for decades, while its defense relationship with Turkey has expanded through military exchanges and cooperation.
For India, the question is whether the pact gives archrival Pakistan a deeper role in a region central to Indian interests.
Read the full story here.
Indian government in exploratory talks for E10 fuel, amid E20 pushback - report
The Indian government has undertaken early exploratory discussions to see if E10 fuel - petrol with 10% ethanol - can be retailed for older vehicles in India, news outlet Indian Express reported, citing unnamed sources.
As per the report, the government is considering retailing E10 fuel along with the already available E20 blend which has received widespread pushback by both vehicle owners and India's opposition leaders.
On Monday, India's Chief Economic Advisor V Anantha Nageswaran had called for bringing back lower ethanol blends in an opinion piece published by the Indian Express.
"Restoring a lower blend at the pumps, say, E10, alongside the option to buy E20, would calm most public concern," he had said.
In June, the Indian government had ruled out providing the option of E10 and pure fuel, arguing that it would leave the country's ethanol production capacity underutilized and impact investments made by various stakeholders.
Government's E20 rollout met with pushback
E20 was rolled out last year and since April 1, it has been the only fuel available for sale at gas stations across the country, part of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's plans to reduce oil imports and help curb pollution.
The move has largely been unpopular.
Since April, vehicle owners have complained of notable reduction in mileage and damage in engine components in older vehicles which are not designed for higher ethanol blends.
Opposition Leaders have raised questions on why motorists are not offered the choice of pure fuel and E10 along with the E20 blend.
Modi's Government has meanwhile tried to assuage concerns, assuring masses that the E20 variant's benefits outweigh the setbacks.
It said the mileage drop was limited to 3-5%. It also cited auto servicing data to say the E20 blend had not caused significant damage to engines in older vehicles.
Hotel blaze in Kolkata kills 9, more feared dead
At least nine people were killed and six others injured in the eastern city of Kolkata after a fire broke out in the early hours of Wednesday, authorities said.
The blaze erupted at around 1:45 a.m. in central Kolkata, a few doors away from the city's fire department headquarters, the Press Trust of India (PTI) reported. The building housed several small hotels.
Five fire-fighting units were deployed to manage the fire while police and rescue teams reached the spot.
Some 80 people had been rescued from the fire, as per the report.
What did officials say?
Fire Department Minister Kaushik Chowdhury said the deceased included both Indian and Bangladeshi nationals.
"We are trying to establish their identities. The situation inside this building is very bad. There are several hotels inside this building. I am shocked to see what was going on here," Chowdhury said.
The minister added that a short circuit could have caused the blaze but an accurate reason would be available only after a forensic examination.
"The building management did not comply with basic safety and construction norms. It is alleged that there were several irregularities in the functioning of the hotel," the minister added.
Meanwhile, a police officer told PTI that dense smoke made it difficult for fire fighters to reach the upper floors. "While nine people have died, more deaths are feared," the officer said.
"Our priority is to rescue those trapped and determine the reasons for the fire. The flames have been doused, but the building is very, very hot. The cooling process is underway," he added.
A different police officer said the owner of the building was absconding and that a case was being registered against him.
The incident comes just days after a hotel fire killed at least eight people in the Tarapith, a temple town located in the same state as Kolkata. Building fires are a common occurrence in India where old wiring and lax safety measures cause hundreds of deaths every year.
Welcome to our coverage
Good morning and welcome to DW's India news blog.
This is Mahima Kapoor reporting from the New Delhi bureau and I will be your guide through the country's busy news cycle.
The Indian government is reportedly in exploratory talks to provide Indians with the option of E10 fuel. That's a blend of fuel for vehicles which includes 90% fuel and 10% ethanol, which is meant to reduce India's dependence on imported oil.
The report comes amid significant pushback against the government's E20 rollout which many vehicle owners believe is damaging their engines.
In eastern India, authorities grappled with yet another hotel fire which killed several people in the early hours of Wednesday. Rescue officials are still working on site but fear the death toll may rise.
Stay tuned for this and more.