What you need to know
- President Donald Trump says the US and Israel will refrain from threatened strikes on Iran to give diplomacy another chance
- Trump nonetheless said that the US was 'locked and loaded and ready to go against the Islamic Republic of Iran'
- Iran has warned against any 'adventurous action' by the US
We've ended coverage. Read below for all the latest headlines on the Iran war on the weekend of August 1-2.
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Thank you for reading
President Donald Trump said in a Truth Social post early Sunday that he canceled new attacks on Iran at the urging of some Gulf allies.
Gulf states, which host US military bases, have faced a barrage of Iranian missiles and drones since the start of the Iran war.
Trump said in his post that Mideast allies had reached the "perimeters" of a deal to end the 5-month-old war.
We'll have more news on whether a peace deal is within reach in blogs and articles through the week.
Israeli airstrikes kill several in Gaza despite ceasefire
Israeli strikes have killed at least eight people in the Gaza Strip on a second consecutive day of aerial attacks.
The continued attacks come despite an announcement by US President Donald Trump that the Palestinian militant group Hamas had agreed to disarm under a US-backed initiative to implement a ceasefire agreement reached last year.
Palestinian health officials said Israeli warplanes carried out separate strikes across the enclave: In Gaza City in the north, the city of Deir al-Balah in the center, and in Khan Younis in the south.
Those killed included at least two children, medics said.
The Israeli military said the strikes in Deir al-Balah targeted two commanders of Hamas' elite "Nukhba" force. It said strikes in Gaza City and nearby Jabalia also targeted "military operatives" but that it was still reviewing the situation.
Israeli strikes have killed at least 1,230 Palestinians since the ceasefire was reached in October.
Israel began an offensive against Hamas in the Gaza Strip after the group, designated as a terrorist organization by several countries, led attacks in southern Israel on October 7, 2023, in which some 1,200 people were killed, the majority of them civilians.
More than 73,000 Palestinians have been killed in the conflict, a toll given by Palestinian authorities but one that the United Nations broadly accepts.
The figure does not differentiate between militants and civilians.
Trump claim that Tehran requested attack stop 'a new lie,' Iran says
US President Donald Trump's claim that Tehran had asked the US to hold off on new strikes was completely false, Iran's semi-official Mehr news agency said on Sunday.
Citing military officials, the agency said the claim "was nothing but a new lie" and that Iran's military was "on high alert and ready for any eventuality."
Trump said on Saturday that the US and Israel had agreed to refrain from new attacks he had threatened after requests "by Iran, and other Middle Eastern countries."
Israeli military says kills several Hezbollah fighters in southern Lebanon
The Israeli military said that it has killed several Hezbollah fighters in southern Lebanon.
In a statement on Sunday, the Israeli military said it had identified several Hezbollah militants inside an area occupied by Israeli forces that Israel has designated as a "security zone."
"Following the identification, the soldiers struck the terrorists and eliminated them in order to remove the threat," the military said in a statement.
An Israeli soldier sustained moderate injuries, the military said earlier.
Pro-Iran Hezbollah brought Lebanon into the wider Middle East conflict when it fired rockets at Israel on March 2 in reaction to the US, Israeli attacks on Iran.
That act triggered major Israeli airstrikes and a ground invasion, with Israel continuing military operations deep into the south of Lebanon since then.
Under a US-sponsored framework agreement signed by Lebanon and Israel in late June, Lebanon's army is to disarm Hezbollah and the Israeli military is to withdraw from "pilot zones" inside Lebanon to be replaced by Lebanese forces.
Hezbollah, however, refuses to disarm, and there has been no timetable set for Israel's full withdrawal.
Saudi crown prince calls for dialogue and de-escalation in call with Trump
Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman stressed "the necessity of prioritizing dialogue to de-escalate tensions" with Iran in a phone call with US President Donald Trump on Saturday, according to Saudi Arabia's state news agency.
Increased calm "would pave the way for diplomatic solutions [...] and prevent a slide into a broader conflict with repercussions affecting regional and international security and stability," the agency said, apparently citing bin Salman, the de facto ruler of Saudi Arabia.
The agency said that "the call also reviewed existing areas of cooperation between the two countries and ways to enhance them."
The report confirms similar accounts in US media about a telephone call between the two, which came shortly before Trump said he would hold off on fresh attacks on Iran that he had threatened.
Iran warns against new US aggression
Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi on Saturday warned that Tehran's armed forces would respond decisively to any act of aggression.
His message on Telegram came after US President Trump made his since-rescinded threats of fresh strikes, and also followed a call with Saudi Foreign Minister Faisal bin Farhan.
In the post, Araghchi said the US, Israel and any Gulf states involved would bear full responsibility for any new attacks.
Tehran had already threatened military retaliation targeting critical infrastructure in Israel and Gulf countries after US media reports that Washington was thinking about major new strikes on Iranian targets, including energy sites.
Since the war began on February 28 with US-Israeli attacks on the Islamic Republic, Iran has already often responded to any strikes by targeting Gulf states hosting US military bases.
Trump says no new strikes on Iran if peace deal is reached soon
US President Donald Trump said Saturday that the United States and Israel had agreed to refrain from carrying out threatened attacks on Iran under the condition that a peace deal with Tehran was reached quickly.
Trump said the US was "locked and loaded and ready to go against the Islamic Republic of Iran," but that Tehran and other Middle Eastern countries had asked him not to carry out fresh strikes.
"Based on this request, I have agreed, for the future benefit of the WORLD and, likewise, the survival of a successful and prosperous Iran, to cancel the attack, subject to being able to rapidly make a DEAL," Trump posted on his Truth Social platform.
"The Country of Israel joins me in this commitment. Get to work, everybody, and get it DONE," he added.
His remarks come after he on Friday threatened to hit Iran "very hard," with reports saying US attacks on Iranian energy infrastructure were being considered.
According to the US media reports, Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman spoke with Trump before Saturday's social media postings to express concerns over the reports of planned new attacks.
The report, which cited US sources close to the talks, said the crown prince urged Trump to de-escalate.
Welcome back to our coverage
We are resuming our reporting on events in the Middle East as the more-than-five-month-long US war on Iran continues to ebb and flow.
Sunday seems likely to see another at least temporary ebb, with US President Donald Trump - who on Friday threatened to hit Iran "very hard" - saying the US and Israel had agreed to hold off on new strikes on the Islamic Republic if a peace deal is "rapidly" reached.
Iran, meanwhile, has reacted to Friday's threat by saying its armed forces would give a decisive response to any renewed acts of aggression.
Read on for more details about the conflict in the Middle East, which is threatening to draw in ever more countries in the region.
We've paused coverage
US President Donald Trump told reporters on Friday he expected US military action against Iran to continue for some time. He said the US will hit Iran "very hard" until they can't take it anymore.
Hours later on Saturday, Kuwait said it responded to a new round of drone attacks from Iran while a tanker was struck in the strategic waterway.
We'll have more on each of those major news angles when we return to this blog on Sunday.
UN warns against ongoing destruction in southern Lebanon
The United Nations on Saturday said it is deeply concerned by ongoing Israeli demolitions in southern Lebanon.
Under a ceasefire deal, Lebanon's army is expected to disarm Iran-backed Hezbollah, while Israeli forces withdraw from designated zones in the south before Lebanese troops deploy.
"The scale of the detonations and demolitions taking place in south Lebanon is deeply concerning, with a devastating impact on civilian infrastructure, cultural heritage, and the collective memory of communities," the office of the UN special coordinator for Lebanon said in a statement on X.
The statement comes a day after the Israeli military triggered explosions near Beaufort Castle in southern Lebanon, which was added to UNESCO's List of World Heritage in Danger last week.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Defence Minister Israel Katz said the army destroyed "terror tunnels in the Beaufort area" using around 700 tonnes of explosives.
"The escalating pattern of destruction must stop as diplomatic channels exist to resolve any outstanding issues," the UN said.
Gaza authorities say three killed in Israeli attacks
Israeli airstrikes killed three people in the Gaza Strip on Saturday according to Palestinian civil defense and health authority sources.
Israel said it had targeted "terrorists" and dismantled five weapons storage facilities in Saturday operations.
The attacks came on the heels of a recent announcement by US President Donald Trump promising the Islamist militant group Hamas would disarm and Israel's army would withdraw from Gaza.
Hamas led the October 7, 2023, surprise attacks on Israel that sparked the war in Gaza.
According to sources in the enclave, two Palestinians were killed in drone strikes in Gaza City and another man was killed during a missile strike on a hospital camp in Deir al-Balah.
Footage of the camp showed a large crater and scattered medical equipment, medical supplies and boxes near tents and two warehouses.
Israel accused Hamas of establishing a weapons depot at the site, citing intelligence reports without making evidence public.
Hospital workers said the warehouses were used to store essential dialysis equipment and supplies and that many people in need of critical medical care had been sheltering in tents near the site.
A ceasefire has been in place in Gaza since October 2025, but Israel has recently killed suspected members of Hamas and the Islamic Jihad militant group there.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has not commented on Trump's ceasefire plan for Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and Hamas disarmament. National Security Minister Itamar Ben-Gvir has called the deal unacceptable, demanding the continuation of Israeli military operations in Gaza.
Israel claims to have killed several Hezbollah fighters
Israel's military on Saturday said its forces killed several Hezbollah fighters in southern Lebanon. A post on the military's official X account said that one of its combat officers was injured during the armed encounter and had been hospitalized.
The post pledged that the Israeli military would "continue to operate to remove any threat its forces and will not allow the Hezbollah terror organization to harm the citizens of the state of Israel."
The incident came despite a ceasefire being in place between Israel and the Iranian-backed militants. While Hezbollah has formally denounced the deal, the group has not claimed any attacks since theUS-sponsored framework agreement was signed by Israel and Lebanon and then put in place in late June.
The agreement remains fragile, with Hezbollah refusing to disarm and Israel refusing to leave southern Lebanon - both points outlined in the agreement.
Despite the relative decline in violence in southern Lebanon, Israel has continued to conduct airstrikes and carry out other military operations.
Lebanon has condemned Israel's operations, saying that its continued military operations make it impossible to fully deploy the Lebanese army as outlined in the deal.
US urges citizens to prepare to leave Middle East
US embassies across the Middle East have urged US nationals to consider leaving the region or be ready to depart if the conflict escalates further.
"Americans in the region should consider departing, or be prepared to depart should there be escalation," security alerts posted by US missions in Amman, Jerusalem and Baghdad said.
The warnings told citizens to check flight information, follow local safety instructions and prepare for cancellations, airspace closures and other travel disruption.
Those in Jordan were advised to stay away from US military bases, which have recently come under Iranian missile attack.
In Israel, US citizens were urged to identify the nearest bomb shelter.
"The Iranian regime is unpredictable," the US Embassy in Jerusalem said, citing recent attacks across the region and an expansion to areas not previously targeted, including Egypt.
A drone struck a US-owned gas vessel moored at an Egyptian port on Wednesday, sparking a fire. Egyptian authorities are investigating and have not publicly blamed any group.
New attacks hit Kuwait and Strait of Hormuz shipping
Kuwait's military says it is responding to a fresh wave of Iranian drone attacks that struck several "vital facilities" in the country.
Defense Ministry spokesperson Maj. Gen. Saud Abdulaziz Al-Otaibi said the targets included a government facility in northern Kuwait. No casualties were reported.
Separate incidents also hit commercial shipping in the Strait of Hormuz.
The United Kingdom Maritime Trade Operations agency said an unidentified projectile struck a tanker on Friday about 11 nautical miles (20 kilometers) northeast of Lima, Oman, damaging its engine room.
On Saturday, another tanker reported a large splash and an explosion nearby while sailing around 21 nautical miles northwest of Khasab.
No casualties were reported in either maritime incident.
Iran has repeatedly targeted vessels attempting to pass through the Strait of Hormuz without its authorization during the conflict with the United States.
Houthis claim Saudi oil shipments diverted
Yemen's Houthi movement says eight Saudi oil tankers have been pushed off their usual routes as part of a newly declared blockade targeting the kingdom's energy exports.
According to the Iran-backed group, the ships will now have to make the much longer journey around South Africa's Cape of Good Hope to reach Asian markets.
Riyadh has not confirmed that any tankers were diverted.
The Houthis announced the blockade last week, framing it as retaliation for what they describe as years of Saudi pressure on Houthi-held parts of Yemen.
The group controls much of northern Yemen, including the capital Sanaa, after seizing territory in 2014 and setting off a war that drew in a Saudi-led coalition backing the internationally recognized government.
A major concern for global shipping is the Bab al-Mandab Strait, the narrow passage between Yemen and the Horn of Africa that links the Red Sea to the Gulf of Aden.
Any serious disruption there would add to pressure on trade routes already affected by the closure of the Strait of Hormuz.
The Houthis said they do not intend to levy transit charges on vessels using the strait.