What you need to know
This blog, covering the latest developments in the US-Israel war with Iran and the wider fallout across the Middle East, has now closed. Read below for an overview of the top headlines on Monday, August 3:
-
Trump calls Iran's leaders 'duplicitous,' tells them to make deal or surrender
-
Iran and Oman plan new route for Strait of Hormuz vessels, Tehran says
-
Cargo vessel 'hit by unknown projectile' off Oman's coast, UKMTO says
-
Trump says new round of Iran talks set for Monday
-
Iran says there are no talks underway with Washington
-
Two tankers with Saudi oil exit Red Sea
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add DW as a Preferred Source on Google.
Cargo vessel 'hit by unknown projectile' off Oman's coast, UKMTO says
The UK Maritime Trade Operations (UKMTO) said it had received a report of an incident off the coast of Oman.
The report, dated Monday but released on Tuesday, said the incident occurred 20 nautical miles northeast of Oman's Al Khasab.
"A cargo vessel has broadcasted on VHF 16 that they have been hit by an unknown projectile," UKMTO said on X, adding that authorities were looking into the incident.
Trump threatens Iran with 'decapitation' if no deal is reached
US President Donald Trump insisted that negotiations with Iran were ongoing, adding that the Islamic Republic was facing a "last chance before decapitation."
Trump told reporters at the White House that he agreed to continue to pursue talks with Iran at the request of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and other countries.
But Iran's foreign ministry has so far denied that negotiations with Washington were taking place.
"We are talking right now," Trump said.
"This is a last chance for them to sign a good document," the US president added. "I want to give them every last chance before decapitation."
The remarks were similar to last week's threat by Trump that Iran would be hit "very hard," facing potentially with renewed attacks against energy infrastructure. But the US president backed down later, saying the "perimeters" of a deal were there.
Board of Peace: Gaza deal possible only with 'complete' Hamas disarmament
US President Donald Trump's Board of Peace said that an Israeli withdrawal in Gaza requires the militant group Hamas's "complete" disarmament.
The board made the statement on the social media platform X, following a meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
"We note that the full withdrawal of the IDF beyond the Yellow Line will take place only once decommissioning (of weapons) is complete, as Hamas committed to the mediators," the board wrote, making reference to a line between the area under Hamas control and that held by the Israeli army.
"Israel and the Board of Peace share a common understanding of the ultimate objectives," the statement added.
Meanwhile, Netanyahu's office said Israel demanded concrete disarmament by Hamas.
"Israel has conveyed its comments and concerns on the proposed framework to our American counterparts. The version that has been made public does not reflect Israel's positions," Doron Spielman, spokesman for the prime minister's office, told the AFP news agency.
Trump calls Iran's leaders 'duplicitous,' tells them to make deal or surrender
US President Donald Trump lashed out at Iran, criticizing it for seeking to work directly with Oman on a solution to the backlog in the Strait of Hormuz.
"Iranian Leadership is unbelievably duplicitous! They ask for a meeting, some would say 'beg,' talks begin, with more scheduled in the immediate future, and they say, openly and proudly, that they're not having any discussions, that nothing is being talked about, and they're only dealing with 'Oman,'" Trump wrote on his social media platform Truth Social.
The remarks come after Iran announced it was negotiating a joint temporary shipping corridor with Oman.
Trump asserted, however, that the Strait of Hormuz is "already completely controlled by the United States Navy" and the blockade it has imposed on it.
"Nothing gets through to Iran, unless we want it to, and nothing will get through, unless a Deal, or Total Surrender, is accomplished," Trump wrote.
The US president also again vowed that Iran would not obtain a nuclear weapon.
Tehran: Iran and Oman plan new route for Strait of Hormuz vessels
Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman Esmaeil Baghaei said the country is negotiating a joint temporary shipping corridor in the strategically important Strait of Hormuz with Oman.
According to the state news agency IRNA the idea would involve a circular route rather than several separate lanes until a final arrangement was reached.
The announcement comes after US President Donald Trump announced a new round of talks with Iranian representative.
Under the plan, tankers or cargo ships would enter the Strait of Hormuz on a northern route through Iranian territorial waters.
After calling at ports in Iran or in Arab Gulf states, the ships would use a southern route through Omani territorial waters for the return journey.
Iran hangs two convicted of espionage
Iran says it executed two men on Monday after they were convicted of spying for Israel.
It is the latest in a series of hangings on espionage allegations carried out by Tehran since the start of the war with Israel and the US in late February.
"Omid Behzad and Pouria Safvat were hanged this morning for transmitting the coordinates of sensitive military and security sites to Mossad agents," said Mizan, the media outlet for Iran's judiciary.
Mossad is Israel's foreign intelligence service.
"They helped the intelligence services achieve their objectives by providing them with information on military and security centres during the war," Mizan added.
Executions in Iran as a whole have risen since the war broke out.
According to Amnesty International and several other rights groups, the country carries out the second-highest number of executions in the world, after China.
At least 1,639 people were executed in Iran last year, a record high since 1989, according to the Norway-based NGO Iran Human Rights and Together Against the Death Penalty (ECPM), which has its headquarters in Paris.
Oil slumps on hopes of Iran deal
Oil prices fell sharply in early Asian trading after US President Donald Trump announced new talks with Iran aimed at ending the Middle East conflict and reopening the Strait of Hormuz.
Brent crude for September delivery dropped more than 6% to $82.41 a barrel in early trade.
The conflict has disrupted energy markets and effectively closed the Strait of Hormuz, a key route for global oil and gas shipment
No current talks with US - Iranian Foreign Ministry
Iran is not currently conducting talks with the US, the Iranian Foreign Ministry said on Monday, adding that it is, however, in discussions with Oman about a temporary safe route through the Strait of Hormuz.
The remarks by ministry spokesperson Esmaeil Baghaei came after US President Donald Trump said new talks with Iran on a peace deal were set to begin on Monday.
"We are not currently negotiating with the United States. Our negotiations are with Oman to secure passage through the Strait of Hormuz," Baghaei said during a weekly press briefing.
He added that a deal with Oman would not be enough to reopen the strait for commercial shipping, as the situation would stay unchanged if the US continued with its "aggression."
Welcome to our coverage
We are continuing our coverage on the US war with Iran and broader developments in the Middle East after US President Donald Trump said he had called off strikes on the West Asian country.
He later told reporters that Washington and Tehran were to carry out new talks on Monday. There was no immediate response from Iran.
Meanwhile, some Saudi oil ships passed through the Bab el-Mandeb Strait despite a stated embargo by Yemen's Iran-backed Houthi militia.
Stay with us for all this and more.
Some Saudi oil shipments get through Bab el-Mandeb
Two tankers carrying Saudi crude successfully crossed the Bab el-Mandeb Strait over the weekend, despite security concerns and a Houthi-declared maritime embargo against Saudi Arabia.
Shipping data showed traffic through the waterway fell sharply amid the heightened security risks, with just 18 commodity vessels passing on Sunday, down from 28 on Friday.
The tankers, Lesvos and Desh Vaibhav, transited with their Automatic Identification System (AIS) tracking systems switched off, the Kpler data showed. Together, they were carrying about three million barrels of Saudi oil.
Desh Vaibhav is heading to India's Sikka port, while Lesvos' destination remains unclear.
Meanwhile, vessel traffic through the Strait of Hormuz also slowed, with commodity crossings dropping after reports of multiple tanker attacks.
The UK Maritime Trade Operations agency says three more attacks have been reported since Saturday, raising fresh concerns over the security of key global energy shipping routes.
What is the conflict between Saudi Arabia and the Houthis?
The Houthis are an Iran-backed militant group that has controlled most of Yemen's more populous areas - including the capital, Sanaa - for a little over a decade.
A coalition led by Saudi Arabia intervened in Yemen in 2015 in support of the country's internationally recognized government, which is de facto based in the southern city of Aden.
While the Saudi-backed government agreed to a truce with the Houthis in 2022, this year tensions have risen again amid the US war with Iran.
Trump says Iran talks to resume amid push to reopen Strait of Hormuz
US President Donald Trump said new talks with Iran are set to begin on Monday after he decided to hold off on striking the Islamic republic to pursue a deal to end the war.
"They said we would much prefer a deal as opposed to an attack, because you don't know where these attacks lead," Trump told reporters aboard Air Force One late on Sunday.
He was looking for a deal to reopen the Strait of Hormuz and address concerns over Tehran's nuclear program.
He gave no details on the venue, participants, or any deadline for an agreement.
The comments followed a social media post in which Trump said Iran and other Middle Eastern countries had requested more time to complete a deal.
Iranian media denied that Tehran had asked Trump not to strike.
Iran and the United States agreed in mid-June on a framework deal to end the war, with details to be finalized during a 60-day transition period, but both sides have since carried out major attacks.