What you need to know
- India's Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan resigns
- Cockroach movement ends protest in 'good faith' after talks with government
- Cockroach Janta Party Founder Abhijeet Dipke says diagnosed with typhoid
- Opposition leaders laud GenZ for 'victory' over Modi government
This blog has now closed. Read below for a roundup of the biggest headlines from India on Saturday, July 25:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Thanks for joining us
As the clocks tick past midnight in Delhi, we'll sign off after an unusually busy Saturday in the capital.
In case you missed the fireworks, here's a quick recap of the day's highlights.
- Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan bowed to pressure following weeks of protests from the Cockroach Janata Party (CJP) and resigned his post
- This followed soon after Prime Minister Narendra Modi finally started to address the youth-led protests directly and seek talks with the CJP
- The government later announced that Pralhad Joshi would be replacing Pradhan
- As for the CJP, they issued a statement saying that they were bringing their protests to an end, cheering what they portrayed as a victory in the struggle with Modi's government
"All our demands have been accepted, so we request the protesters to withdraw immediately and return home peacefully," chief CJP spokesperson Saurav Das told reporters.
The apparent breakthrough follows intensified demonstrations in Delhi this week, including sometimes clashes between police and protesters, with the story once again starting to attract headlines well beyond India's borders.
By all means come back and join us tomorrow for more on this story and whatever else is making the news in and around India.
India trounce Zimbabwe in 2nd T20, sealing 3-game series
In other news, the Indian cricket team dismantled Zimbabwe's batting order in Saturday's T20 in Harare, claiming a comfortable victory.
India skittled Zimbabwe for a meager 129 runs before the 20 overs elapsed, with Abhishek Sharma claiming 3 wickets for 17 runs - making amends after scoring a disappointing 8 runs with the bat by unpacking his left arm orthodox spin bowling.
The hosts therefore fell well short of the Indian target of 219.
Ishan Kishan was the top scorer with the bat, racking up 81 off 44 deliveries.
Tilak Varma also impressed, hitting an unbeaten 60 off just 29 balls toward the end of the innings. Teenage opening sensation Vaibhav Sooryavanshi raced to 20 off just 9 balls but fell to a catch by Blessing Muzarabani early in the innings.
India now lead the three-game T20 series 2-0.
The last T20 game will be played on Sunday, followed by a three-game series of One Day Internationals.
BJP veteran Pralhad Joshi named replacement education minister
India's president's office has announced a replacement education minister following Dharmendra Pradhan's resignation on Saturday.
A press release from the president's Rashtrapati Bhavan residence said that Pralhad Joshi would be taking over the role.
"The President of India, as advised by the Prime Minister, has accepted the resignation of Shri Dharmendra Pradhan from the Union Council of Ministers, with immediate effect, under clause (2) of Article 75 of the Constitution of India," the communique read.
"Further, as advised by the Prime Minister, the President has directed that Shri Pralhad Joshi, Cabinet Minister, be assigned the charge of the Ministry of Education, in addition to his existing portfolio," it continued.
This could leave 63-year-old BJP veteran Joshi - a five-term member of the Lok Sabha parliament and Hindu nationalist known for his activism on the disputed region of Kashmir in his younger days - with his hands rather full.
He was already India's minister for consumer affairs, food and public distribution - and for new and renewable energy - prior to taking on a third and more senior portfolio as of Saturday.
WATCH: Education minister concedes to 'Cockroach' demands, resigns
India's Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan resigned after nationwide youth-led protests over alleged irregularities in major exams.
Demonstrators organised by the social media-driven Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) demanded education reforms, compensation for affected students and the withdrawal of cases against protesters.
After renewed talks, the government accepted the group's demands, prompting CJP to end the demonstrations. The protests became one of the most significant challenges to Prime Minister Narendra Modi's administration since his 2024 re-election.
UNESCO adds Buddhist holy site Sarnath to World Heritage list
The ancient site of Sarnath, one of the eight holiest places of pilgrimage for Buddhists, has been added to UNESCO's World Heritage list.
The ancient site, said to be the location of the Buddha's first sermon to his disciples after achieving enlightenment, becomes India's 45th World Heritage Site.
"For more than 2,500 years, Sarnath has been a place of pilgrimage and inspiration for Buddhists around the world. It is here that the Buddha delivered his first sermon, sharing teachings of compassion, wisdom and peace that continue to resonate today," Tim Curtis, the director of UNESCO's regional office for South Asia, said in a statement.
"Its temples, stupas, and monasteries bear witness to centuries of faith, devotion, and shared human heritage. Safeguarding this exceptional site is our collective responsibility for present and future generations," Curtis said.
Sarnath is located in Varanasi, one of the world's oldest inhabited cities, in Uttar Pradesh.
Two protected archaeological sites - the Chaucandi Stupa and the Archaeological Remains of Sarnath, which include the Dhamek Stupe and the Darmarajika Stupa - make up a historic landscape widely known as Deer Park.
UNESCO's World Heritage Committee is holding its 48th annual session in Busan in South Korea this week, making decisions on various new candidates for inclusion in its World Heritage lists.
Where did the Cockroach Janta Party come from?
As the NEET-UG controversy was building, so was the accidental Cockroach Janta Party.
That journey began when the Chief Justice of India ridiculed India's youth, likening them to "parasites and cockroaches." The judge has since said his words were taken out of context but it had already struck a cord among India's GenZ.
Abhijeet Dipke, a 30-year-old Indian who recently graduated from Boston University with a master's degree in public relations and political strategy, asked "what if all cockroaches came together?"
He created a satirical party fashioned after the Ruling Bharatiya Janata Party, and millions signed up on its website and social media. Dipke successfully tapped into the frustration of young Indians who have long been facing irregularities in education and lack of job opportunities.
Slowly, both merged and Dipke began speaking out about the NEET-UG controversy. Over a month ago, less than a hundred of Cockroach Janta Party members and supporters began camping at Jantar Mantar in the capital Delhi overnight.
Protests continued but remained modest until Indian activist and educational reformist Sonam Wangchuk joined in to lend his popularity to the cause. He began an indefinite hunger strike.
By the 20th day of the hunger strike, attention on the protest grew. On the 21st day, Wangchuk was "forcefully" moved to a hospital by Delhi police. The visuals of Wangchuk's removal turned the proverbial spark into a fire.
Hundreds of thousands of young Indians descended on central Delhi in a historical march to Parliament on Monday, July 20, when police eventually deployed tear gas and batons to stop them from reaching the building.
In less than a week, Pradhan resigned, and the movement said it was ending its protest after all its demands have been met.
What is the NEET-UG scandal which led to Pradhan's resignation?
If you've just heard of the the massive protest movement in India which today led to Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan's resignation, let me catch you up on what got the ball rolling.
In the first week of May, over 2.2 million medical profession aspirants sat for a national medical test across India. That's the National Eligibility cum Entrance Test - Undergraduate, abbreviated NEET-UG.
It is the sole gateway to undergraduate medical courses across India, and millions of aspirants compete for fewer than 150,000 seats, making it one of India's toughest entrance exams.
In the days after the exam, allegations emerged that the question paper had been leaked ahead of the exam, prompting authorities to cancel the test and reschedule a second attempt for June 21.
Between the cancellation and retest, Indian media reported that at least 20 students had taken their own lives due to the daunting thought of having to sit through the high-pressure exam once more.
This was not the first time the NEET-UG or a national exam had been leaked. The incident and related deaths sparked anger among masses and focused attention on other failures within India's education system.
Discourse over corruption, exam manipulation and failure of the Education Ministry have since grown, snowballing into the protest movement which has shaken the country this week, culminating with Pradhan's resignation
CJP ends protest in 'good faith' after education minister resigns
India's Cockroach movement and youth protesters have agreed to end their demonstration, a spokesperson of the Cockroach Janta Party told reporters on Saturday.
"All our demands have been accepted, so we request the protesters to withdraw immediately and return home peacefully," chief CJP spokesperson Saurav Das told reporters.
This comes immediately after talks with the government held post Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan's resignation.
Opposition leaders laud Gen Z victory
"Well done to students across the country; we are proud of all of you," Congress leader Rahul Gandhi said in a video message reacting to the education minister's resignation.
"Dharmendra Pradhan's resignation is a huge step towards reshaping our education system," he said, adding they still had to hold accountable those guilty of violence against students.
Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, Congress leader and sister to Gandhi, said: "Today is the day an undemocratic and oppressive government was forced to bend to the will of the people of India."
Former Delhi Chief Minister and one of the most vocal Narendra Modi critics, Arvind Kejriwal, congratulated Generation Z for their accomplishment.
"People had lost faith in democracy..the government should understand that they have to listen to the people," he said. "The world bends, all it takes is someone to bend it."
"The resignation of the education minister is an acknowledgment that accountability in a democracy cannot be indefinitely evaded," said opposition leader and Member of Parliament Shashi Tharoor.
"But accountability does not end with a resignation. The deeper failures that brought us here must now be addressed through transparent reforms..." he added.
Protesters celebrate Pradhan's resignation at Jantar Mantar
Scenes of jubilation and celebration erupted on phone screens as the Cockroach Janta Party went live from the protest site at Jantar Mantar, following the resignation of Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan.
Sweat-soaked youths and Cockroach movement leaders jumped in excitement, clapped their hands and threw their fists up in the air. "This is a victory of India's youth," Dipke said, with mic in hand and a wide smile on his face.
'It's a victory of democracy': Sonam Wangchuk
Activist Sonam Wangchuk celebrated the news of Pradhan's resignation from a hospital in Gurago, where he is still recovering from a 26-day hunger strike.
"IT'S A VICTORY OF DEMOCRACY direct democracy... straight from the streets," he said in a post.
"Congratulations CJP, Gen Z of the nation and thank you all citizens for shedding fear and the fear of fear and rising up from every corner of the nation," he said, adding that it was now time to move from demanding accountability to reforms.
'Remember, do not mess with cockroach': Dipke
When Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan broke the news of his resignation in a two-page explanation letter, the Cockroach Janta Party's immediate reaction - at least on social media - was not celebration.
The political pressure group simply posted an "update" on its core demands from the government.
"1.Dharmendra Pradhan must resign - *CHECK*
2. 1 crore to the families of all students who died by suicide - PENDING
3. No action against any of the student protesters - PENDING," the post said.
In a speech addressing protesters at Jantar Mantar, CJP Founder Abhijeet Dipke said action must be taken against the police officers who injured women and students by the use of inappropriate and brutal force.
He named certain police officers accused of brutality and said, "if we can make a minister resign, what are you?" he said.
"Remember, do not mess with cockroach," Dipke said, adding: "and to the people of India, this is how a democracy should be."
Also in a moment of humility, Dipke asked supporters not to make him a "hero" because of Pradhan's resignation. "Don't make this mistake...The country has been ruined because of making one person a hero," he said, alluding to Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan resigns
India's Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan said he has sent his resignation to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in what is being seen as a major victory for the Cockroach movement and student protesters.
It was not immediately clear if Modi has or will accept Pradhan's resignation.
"Amid the situation that has emerged in Jantar Mantar and across the country, my resignation has been sent to the Honorable Prime Minister so that anti-national forces do not take advantage of the situation, the unity of the country remains intact, no student in India gets entangled in legal complications, and our children can focus their time on their studies and careers," Pradhan said in a post on X.
"I deeply respect the aspirations, feelings, and legitimate expectations of the country's youth," he went on to say.
Cheers erupted among the thousands of protesters who have been rallying in central Delhi and elsewhere as the news spread. The update reached protesters quickly despite suspended internet services in and around the protest site.
This is the second time Modi's government has faced a significant and public setback due to a mass protest.
In 2021, the government was forced to repeal contentious farm sector laws after hundreds of thousands of farmers and union leaders camped at the borders of Delhi. Farmers had argued that the new legislation would leave eat into their income and leave them vulnerable to large corporations.
CJP calls for nationwide candle march on Sunday
The Cockroach movement has called for a nationwide candle march on Sunday evening, as it looks to keep up the pressure on the Narendra Modi government.
"One person, one candle. For every student the government failed. March together in silence," the poster said.
That is despite ongoing talks between the movement's spokespeople and the government. CJP leaders and protesters on the ground have said that they will keep taking to the streets until Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan resigns.
Critics of the movement have pointed out that the government has arrested several reported to be involved in the paper leak scandal. Moreover, paper leaks have long happened in India even under previous governments. A common arguments is that removing a minister would not make a difference.
Countering this, protesters and their supporters have said that as education minister, the buck stops with Pradhan. CJP leaders have repeated that the minister must take accountability for the leak, which reportedly pushed at least 20 students to suicide.
PM Modi 'thanks friends' in another late night video
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi uploaded yet another reel overnight - this time thanking "friends" for their suggestions over a Gen-Z style video posted late the night before.
"I had a chance to meet you all late last night. The response to the video I posted, the insightful suggestions... thank you everybody," he said in the latest video.
In the previous reel, the prime minister had appealed to the nation that the government had taken several steps to counter the paper leak issue. It was one of his lesser-produced videos shot in a less-than ideal angle, seemingly in an attempt to connect with the youth.
Many protesters on ground read the video as a "desperate attempt" to manage the students' anger as protests began to spread nationwide. "He suddenly woke up and posted a panic reel because they didn't expect the protests to reach this stage," one protesters told DW, asking to stay anonymous over fear of backlash.
Meanwhile, social media did what it does best and made memes.
The Prime Minister appears to have acknowledged that he is watching and learning.