Several people were killed and others injured in a shooting at a high school in Thailand's Nonthaburi province, north of the capital city of Bangkok, local authorities said.
Students, teachers and other workers were evacuated from school as authorities deployed police officers, rescue workers and emergency doctors to the scene.
Boy accused of killing grandparents before school shooting
According to the police, the suspected gunman, who is a student at the school, first fatally shot his grandparents with his grandfather's handgun. Then, he went to his school and killed three teachers and three students before killing himself.
Earlier, Thai national police spokesperson Trairong Phiwphan said that 15 people were wounded.
In a statement, police said the gunman fired 26 rounds, and an additional 34 rounds of ammunition were found at the scene.
Meanwhile, Thailand's Prime Minister Anutin Charnvirakul expressed his condolences and stated that he had instructed relevant officials to assist those affected.
"It's such a terrible incident. It should never have happened. How could this happen in our country?" he told reporters.
Students express shock
The incident took place at the Debsirin Nonthaburi School in the Bang Kruai district of Nonthaburi.
"I didn't think it was a gun at first," an 18-year-old student told Reuters, adding that he initially thought there were firecrackers. "There were many shots: bang bang bang. Then it went quiet. Then it started again."
"I was afraid that I would die, and I was scared that I wouldn't be able to pursue my dreams," said Pawarisa Maylissa, a grade 12 student who hopes to attend medical school. "I heard many gunshots very loudly because it seemed the suspect was on the floor directly above us. I could even hear bullets hitting the floor."
According to district authorities, the Debsirin Nonthaburi School had an enrollment of around 3,100 students and 147 teachers in the 2025 academic year.
School shootings in Thailand
Thailand has one of the highest rates of gun ownership in the region. It is estimated that around 10 million firearms are in circulation, or about one for every seven people.
In February, a 17-year-old stole a gun from the police and opened fire at a public high school in southern Thailand. The two-hour attack resulted in one death and two injuries.
Edited by: Dmytro Hubenko
Don't let the algorithm hide the news. If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google by clicking here and hitting the "star" or "preferred" button, so you'll always see our verified news first.