What you need to know
This blog is now closed. Below are developments in the war in Iran and wider conflict in the Middle East from Tuesday, August 11:
- Trump confirmed he took a secret flight out of Ankara after July's NATO summit, amid threat from Iran, after the Washington Post first reported it
- US-Iran talks on peace and reopening Strait of Hormuz hit impasse
- Israel and Venezuela resume consular ties after 17-year break
- Lebanon abolishes death penalty in regional first
- Oil prices steady after massive gains as market loses hope for a deal
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Trump confirms secret flight but downplays threat
US President Donald Trump told reporters that he secretly switched aircraft after a NATO summit in Turkey last month following security advice from the Secret Service and military over a potential threat.
"Well, it's only up to Secret Service. I just follow what they'd like to do, so I go by Secret Service and the military," Trump said.
An initial report by the Washington Post on Monday said Trump was moved from Air Force One to a smaller military aircraft via an airport catering vehicle, while aides and journalists remained on the presidential plane.
Trump confirmed the switch but said he was not concerned by any threat.
"I guess there was a threat out there. I didn't really ask too much about it. I get a lot of threats," Trump said. "I have a lot of threats that you don't know about. Any consequential president has a lot of threats. Non-consequential presidents don't get threats."
US says forces fired on tanker in Gulf of Oman
US Central Command on Tuesday said its forces fired on a Panama-flagged tanker in the Gulf of Oman Tuesday after the vessel's crew ignored warnings to stop.
CENTCOM said the crew of a Navy MH-60 helicopter fired two hellfire missiles into the engine room of the M/V Vela Nova, disabling its steering.
The ship was said to be in violation of a US blockade of Iranian ports when attacked by the US chopper.
A CENTCOM post on X said the Vela Nova is "no longer transiting to Iran."
The statement went on to say that the US had redirected 55 commercial ships in violation of the blockade, adding that it had disabled three non-compliant vessels and boarded two more.
The US Navy currently has more than 15 warships deployed to the Arabian Sea, including two aircraft carriers and an amphibious assault ship.
Lebanon becomes first Middle East country to abolish death penalty
Lebanon's parliament voted to abolish capital punishment on Tuesday, making it the first country in the Middle East to do away with the death penalty.
The country has not carried out an execution since 2004, but until Monday had continued to hand out death sentences. In January, the rights group Amnesty International (AI) said that at least 85 individuals were in death row cells in Lebanon.
To date, death sentences have handed down for crimes such as murder, terrorism or espionage, which will now be punished with life sentences involving hard labor.
Justice Minister Adel Nassar, who attended Tuesday's parliamentary session, called the vote a "historic step" for Lebanon.
The European Union said Lebanon was "setting a powerful example for other countries in the Middle East and beyond," whereas UN rights chief Volker Türk called on Lebanon's neighbors "to follow its lead in ending this inhumane practice."
UN Special Coordinator for Lebanon Jean Arnault said the change "advances the country's adherence to international human rights standards and justice with human dignity."
Capital punishment is commonly meted out across the region, with Amnesty International documenting more than 2,000 executions in Iran last year and more than 350 in Saudi Arabia.
Israel, Venezuela renew consular ties after 17 years
Israel and Venezuela on Tuesday announced the resumption of consular ties after a diplomatic break of 17 years.
"Following talks held in recent weeks and days between Israeli Foreign Minister Gideon Saar and Venezuelan Foreign Minister Felix Plasencia, Israel and Venezuela have agreed to renew consular relations," read a statement from Israel's Foreign Ministry.
"The talks resulted in an agreement to establish a coordination mechanism that will enable the provision of consular services to citizens of both countries."
Venezuela, along with Bolivia, broke off diplomatic relations with Israel in 2009 over an Israeli offensive in the Gaza Strip.
Tuesday's announcement comes in the wake of generous Israeli disaster relief for Venezuelan earthquake victims.
It also comes as new Venezuelan leader Delcy Rodriguez's administration adopts a markedly more cooperative stance towards US President Donald Trump after he ordered the abduction and arrest of her predecessor, Nicolas Maduro.
A joint statement said both Israel and Venezuela recognize "the importance of the relationship between the State of Israel and the Jewish community residing in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which serves as an important bridge of historic friendship between the two countries."
Syria sentences Assad to death in absentia
A Syrian court has sentenced former President Bashar Assad to death in absentia.
Assad was ousted in December 2024 after rebel forces swept into Damascus, ending more than five decades of rule by the Assad family. He and his family to Russia, where he was granted asylum. Moscow is understood to have refused to extradite the toppled dictator.
For more on the story, you can check out our article here.
Container ship reportedly hit by missile in Gulf of Oman
A container ship is believed to have been struck by a missile in the Gulf of Oman, according to maritime security sources.
The United Kingdom Maritime Trade Operations agency said it had received a report of an incident involving a commercial vessel and military forces, later correcting the vessel type from a tanker to a container ship.
Initial assessments identified the vessel as the Panama-flagged Vela Nova.
British maritime risk management group Vanguard and a separate maritime security source said the ship was believed to have been hit while sailing around 71 nautical miles (132 kilometers) off Pakistan's coast.
Three killed in reported Houthi attack on cargo ship
Three crew members have been killed in a reported Houthi attack on a commercial vessel near the Bab al-Mandab Strait, according to Yemeni government-linked sources.
Two Yemeni coast guard sources and two military officials said the Iran-aligned group attacked a deck cargo ship on Tuesday.
Yemeni pro-government broadcaster Al Yumhuriya said the vessel was hit by a missile and that the dead were two Pakistani nationals and one Indonesian.
The ship's name and nationality were not immediately given.
Yemeni government sources said authorities were working to confirm the circumstances of the attack.
US has 'swept entire Strait of Hormuz' of mines: Trump
President Donald Trump said that the US has cleared the Strait of Hormuz of mines, and that the critical trade route was open to commercial traffic.
Trump told reporters at the White House that the US had 100% control of the waterway.
"A little bit complex because they [Iran] will, on occasion, drop a mine, and we find the mines. You know, we've mine swept the entire Strait," he said.
Trump's comments came as Washington and Tehran have been negotiating the full reopening of the strait for some time. Iran has linked the route's reopening to concessions from the US and its allies while affirming plans to charge commercial vessels passing through the strait.
Trump responded to the concessions demand saying he too would demand compensation from Iran, for all the people injured or killed in the conflict.
Over the last weekend, US Vice President JD Vance said that Iran had laid a large number of mines in the Strait at he beginning of the war.
READ: Is Iran's middle class being pushed into poverty?
The war has intensified Iran's economic crisis, squeezing household budgets, hurting businesses.
Read DW's report on growing fears that millions of middle-income families in Iran are slipping closer to poverty.
Oil prices steady after increase, as hopes for a deal fade
Global crude oil prices steadied on Tuesday, after a significant rise amid persisting uncertainty over the reopening of the Strait of Hormuz.
Brent crude and US crude futures were both up slightly on Tuesday morning, reaching the highest levels since July 31, after the contracts spiked roughly 5% on Monday.
The price of Brent hovered just under $88 (€76) a barrel, having swing between $72 and $102 last month.
Oil prices have risen around 10% over the past week, fanning inflationary fears and revitalizing expectations of a possible US interest rate hike in 2026.
"We're now in a bit of a Mexican standoff, if you'd like, in terms of who blinks first," Tony Sycamore, a market Analyst at IG told Reuters.
"This is going to be almost a war of attrition now," he said. "You probably can see the (oil) market sitting around the $75 to $95 range while we wait to see who blinks first."
Trump took secret flight out of Turkey over Iran threat - report
US President Donald Trump reportedly departed from Turkey on a secret military flight in July, instead of flying aboard an older Air Force One plane as announced by the White House.
This was in response to a credible Iranian assassination threat, the Washington Post reported, as the monthslong war continued.
Trump had taken the newly renovated Qatari-donated jet to Ankara for the NATO summit in July. However, he unexpectedly announced he would used an older Air Force One when departing the country, "for old times's sake." The move had then raised questions over the donated jet's safety.
Trump boarded the older Air Force One in front of cameras but was secretly shuttled by an airport catering truck to a smaller plane, an Air Force C-32A, the Washington Post said, citing corroborating material and a US official familiar with the operation.
Journalists aboard the decoy Air Force One, where they believed they were to be accompanied by the US President, said they had been advised to keep their window shades closed in the press cabin.
When they inquired about it later, Trump said it was because they were "probably on a dangerous flight."
"But if I go, you go. Right?" he added.
The White House did not directly address the report.
Communications director Steven Cheung told the Post there were "many enemies of America" targeting Trump and that every available tool was being used to counter threats.
Welcome to our coverage
Hello and welcome to DW's coverage of the war in Iran and developments from across the Middle East.
US President Donald Trump reportedly took a secret flight out of Turkey after the NATO summit in July, according to the Washington Post. The report describes how the US President was smuggled into a smaller plane, provoking mental visuals straight out of a Hollywood movie, to thwart a possible assassination attempt by Iran.
Trump meanwhile, has scoffed at Iran's demands of concessions and reparations, saying he too would seek conflict compensations as part of a peace deal. With this, negotiations over a truce and the possible reopening of the Strait of Hormuz seem to have hit a wall once more.
The news had an effect on global markets as well, initially sending oil prices soaring, but they have now stabilized.
Stay tuned!