A German court on Friday sentenced an 81-year-old man to life in prison for the rape and murder of a US tourist over 30 years ago.
Amy Lopez was 24 when she was raped and killed by the convicted man in 1994.
Hans S., whose last name is not given as per Germany's privacy laws, was only arrested earlier this year, when police were finally able to identify him using new DNA technology.
What do we know about the US tourist's murder?
Lopez's body was found near the historic Ehrenbreitstein Fortress in Germany's western city of Koblenz in September 1994 by children playing in the area. Her corpse bore stab wounds, severe head injuries and injuries consistent with strangling.
The regional court in Koblenz found that Hans S. had lured her into a secluded building, falsely promising to show her the way to a hostel, only to tie her up, rape her and then stab her nine times.
The court found that Hans S. had been "looking for a victim to rape" and that Lopez "was tragically in the wrong place at the wrong time."
The defendant confessed to the crime in general terms.
The courtroom was full of observers right through to the final day of what the judge called an "extraordinary case." Among those in attendance, were Amy's father and brother.
"Of course, the verdict cannot undo what happened, nor can it bring Amy back," said lawyer Kathrin Kienle, who represented the victim's family.
"But Amy's father and brother have told me that, in fact, they were never able to find any inner peace throughout this whole time whilst the perpetrator remained at large."
How was the defendant identified after 30 years?
The defendant had been known to authorities for other sexual offenses, serving prison sentences that lasted up to several years. Some of the incidents took place after 1994, with the most recent being in 2005.
His DNA had been on file since his 1999 conviction of attempting to rape a 16-year-old girl.
Though the genetic date had been later deleted, police managed to obtain a new saliva sample from the suspect, which matched a DNA trace found on Lopez's clothing.
His lawyer said he voluntarily provided the DNA sample because "he finally wanted clarity," describing his crime as "an enormous burden" on him.
The defendant was arrested at a nursing home in Koblenz at the end of February 2026.
After the verdict, defense lawyer Volker Klein said he did not intend to lodge an appeal or seek a review.
Edited by: Rob Turner
If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google by clicking here and hitting the "star" or "preferred" button, so you'll always see our verified news first.