Pro-Palestinian protesters are expected to gather in Philadelphia on Saturday at Ed Sheeran's first show since US rapper Macklemore was removed from the tour for making Pro-Palestinian comments during a performance.
Sheeran, one of the best-selling musical artists of all time, has denied responsibility for dropping the US rapper from the lineup, saying the promoter made the decision.
Why was Macklemore dropped from Sheeran's tour?
Earlier this month, while performing at the opening of Sheeran's US Loop Tour in New Jersey, Macklemore expressed pro-Palestinian sentiments.
"One of the reasons why I wanted to come on this tour was because I wanted to stand up here on stages and stadiums across America and say two words that are very near and dear to my heart: 'Free Palestine.'"
Macklemore's comments were fiercely criticized by supporters of Israel in the US and led to him being removed from the tour.
His removal sparked a backlash that saw support acts quitting and Sheeran facing a stream of criticism.
Irish folk band Beoga, Sheeran's backing act, announced it was leaving the tour. In an Instagram statement, the band said it "fully supported" Macklemore's message.
Sheeran says he is 'not complicit' in Macklemore's removal
Sheeran released a statement on Tuesday laying out his apolitical stance on the matter.
"I am appalled by the conflict between Israel and Palestine. The suffering and pain caused on both sides is a human tragedy," Sheeran said.
The 35-year-old British performer said, "Upcoming tour dates had communicated that they would pull the shows if he was still supporting."
Sheeran added that American billionaire Robert Kraft, who owns Gillette Stadium near Boston where he was due to perform, was among those demanding Macklemore be cut from the tour.
"I am not complicit. I have my personal views on this devastating conflict. Just because I choose not to speak publicly, it doesn't mean I don't have them, and it doesn't mean I don't care," he said on Instagram on Tuesday.
"Those who come to my shows do not expect a political forum," the English singer-songwriter added.
Kraft said in a statement on Monday that the decision to remove Macklemore from the tour was a result of the rapper's recent comments "and a broader history of antisemitic rhetoric and imagery."
Pro-Palestinian rally planned
Local groups have planned a pro-Palestinian rally near the concert venue on Saturday afternoon.
The AFP news agency cited local police as saying there would be an "appropriate police presence" to "help ensure the safety of concertgoers, employees and neighborhood residents."
Sheeran began his tour in Auckland, New Zealand, in January and is set to wrap up in Mexico City, Mexico, in December, with shows still scheduled across North and South America.
Edited by: Karl Sexton
If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google by clicking here and hitting the "star" or "preferred" button, so you'll always see our verified news first.