What you need to know
- Sonam Wangchuk's hunger strike now in its 20th day
- Wangchuk and the Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) are demanding the resignation of Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan
- Arvind Kejriwal and the Congress party express support for Wangchuk
- Journalists' union slams PM Narendra Modi's 'unwillingness' to hold press conferences
- Modi officially launches India's first hydrogen-powered train
This blog has now closed. Read below for a roundup of the latest news from India on Friday, July 17:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Thank you for reading!
That's all from us in Delhi today! Thank you so much for tuning in!
Be sure to catch us again tomorrow for a weekend edition of our India coverage.
'This is for my children': Voices from CJP protest at Jantar Mantar
On Friday, the Delhi heat had relented only but a little to settle on 39 degree Celsius, although the "feels like" temperature was still 46 degrees.
And yet, the crowds gathered by the hundreds at the capital's most famous protest spot - outside a 300-year-old astronomical observatory.
At Jantar Mantar, protesters gathered as the hunger strike of activist Sonam Wangchuk and four others calling for the resignation of Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan reached the twentieth day.
Wangchuk, along with the Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) and other organizations, are demanding Pradhan's resignation over alleged exam irregularities.
'A call to duty,' protester says
For CJP volunteer Ankit Yadav, who is from Mainpuri in Uttar Pradesh, some 300 kilometers from New Delhi, it was a call to duty after a neighbor died by suicide due to the cancellation of an exam whose question paper had been leaked.
"I knew I had to do something," he said. "No one else was doing anything."
He said seeing all the people gives him hope and motivates him, even though no one from the government has reached out to the protesters.
Shyam, an auto rickshaw driver, said he had been giving some students free rides to the protest site.
"This is the least I can do. I am doing this for my young children and their future."
Also at the protest was Rahul. His son had taken an exam for government jobs, the SSC Stenographer Exam in 2025. While the results were declared on June 18, they were withdrawn the next day "suspecting inaccurate evaluation," according to authorities.
"Now all the youngsters who celebrated their selection are depressed and facing an uncertain future," Rahul said. "That's why I am here on their behalf."
The cacophony of sounds blended speeches from the stage, where CJP leader Abhijeet Dipke addressed the crowd, with loud patriotic music emanating elsewhere.
There were also hosts of policemen stationed on the ground overseeing extensive security checks, with a banner right up ahead reading, "The heat of young blood will melt the valley of snow."
Students continue hunger strike with Sonam Wangchuk despite worsening health
Alongside Sonam Wangchuk, three students are also on hunger strike, demanding the resignation of India's Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan.
Neha, Manish and Aameen on Friday continued their protest despite their deteriorating health conditions.
The three are members of the All India Students' Association (AISA) and PhD scholars at different universities.
Doctors affiliated with the Delhi government have been monitoring the health of the protesters twice a day. Three other hunger strikers have already withdrawn from the protest due to health concerns.
AISA Delhi president Saiyed was seated opposite his fellow protesters as they rested on makeshift beds at the protest site.
He said his colleagues wanted to continue the hunger strike to highlight the lives lost to suicides allegedly linked to irregularities in the highly competitive National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test (Undergraduate), or NEET-UG, the entrance examination for medical colleges in India.
It will be months before they will be able to eat properly, but they want their voices to be heard, he said.
Saiyed has been part of the protest since it began on June 20 and had previously participated in demonstrations against examination paper leaks.
Aside from the three students, another protester, Hamad, is also on hunger strike.
"This protest goes beyond education, beyond the people's anger over examination question paper leaks. It's also a protest against the curbing of our democratic rights," Saiyed said.
"At the end of the day, this protest is to claim a little of the democratic space which was snatched from us."
India's first hydrogen-powered train hits the tracks
Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday officially launched India's first domestically built, hydrogen-powered train as the country joined a handful of nations that use the zero-emission technology.
"This is a very significant day in the direction of self-reliant India and sustainable development," Modi said on X.
What do we know about the new hydrogen-powered train?
The locomotive - which is designed, engineered and built in India - is powered by a 1,200-kilowatt hydrogen fuel cell propulsion system.
The train, known as the Namo Green Rail, will shuttle two times a day between the cities of Jind and Sonipat in the northern state of Haryana, which borders the capital, New Delhi. It will cover a one-way distance of 90 kilometers (55 miles).
It has 10 coaches in total: two are hydrogen-powered driving cars and eight are passenger coaches.
The train can run at speeds of up to 75 kilometers per hour and carry a maximum of some 2,600 passengers, railway officials said.
The pilot project also includes hydrogen storage and refueling infrastructure to test the use of the technology in India's vast rail network, as per officials.
India has now joined countries such as Germany, Japan, China and the United States that are testing or operating hydrogen-powered trains.
The rollout is part of India's bid to develop green hydrogen and reduce carbon emissions. The country has set an ambitious target to achieve net-zero carbon emissions by 2070.
Hydrogen fuel cells generate electricity on board by combining hydrogen and oxygen to produce water vapor as the only direct emission.
Three children among four killed as train hits school van
Four people, including three school students, were killed after a passenger train struck a school van at a railway crossing in the eastern West Bengal state on Friday, according to multiple media reports.
A cyclist was also killed in the accident, police said, while four others, including the driver of the van, were critically injured.
According to reports, the van driver and a cyclist were attempting to cross the tracks when a local train hit the vehicle.
The injured were taken to a local hospital, while the bodies of the deceased were sent for post-mortem examinations.
Modi's 'unwillingness' to hold press conferences criticized by journalist body
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi was called out by a journalist association for his "unwillingness to address unscripted press conferences" on Thursday.
During Modi's recent trip to New Zealand, Indian foreign ministry official Rudrendra Tandon told a New Zealand journalist that the prime minister preferred to communicate directly with the electorate when asked why he had not held a press conference during the visit.
In a statement posted on X, the Editors Guild of India called this argument "deeply flawed."
The journalist association said that the prime minister, who has been in power since 2014, "has been reluctant to share his views" with the media on major issues including the Middle East energy crisis.
"Scripted, one-way communications, largely through social media channels, are not a substitute for public interaction with independent media," the statement said.
In his 12 years in office, Modi has only held one press conference, according to reports. Even at that briefing in 2019, Modi only spoke briefly before deflecting all questions to Union Home Minister Amit Shah. He has not held any open, unscripted press conferences.
In May, during a trip to Oslo, Norwegian journalist Helle Lyng sparked controversy after she called out to him after a press appearance, asking why he does not take questions. Lyng got no response.
Modi has also not taken any questions on the Cockroach Janta Party protest calling for the resignation of one his ministers, or the hunger strike of activist Sonam Wangchuk which has entered its 20th day.
India is ranked 157th out of 180 countries in the 2026 World Press Freedom Index.
Sonam Wangchuk continues hunger strike into 20th day
Education reform and environmental activist Sonam Wangchuk remained steadfast in his resolve to continue his hunger strike, which entered its 20th day on Friday, despite concerns over his deteriorating health.
Wangchuk, along with supporters of the Cockroach Janta Party (CJP), are camped at the capital's historic grounds of Jantar Mantar, demanding the resignation of India's Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan, over alleged exam irregularities.
According to the PTI news agency, citing the doctor overseeing Wangchuk, the activist has lost more than nine kilograms (nearly 20 pounds) since beginning his fast on June 28.
Wangchuk has refused to end his fast, saying doing so would send a message to the government that they don't have to be accountable to the people.
Meanwhile, solidarity came from across the political divide as both former Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal and the Congress party expressed their support for Wangchuk.
Kejriwal on Thursday joined demonstrators and called for Pradhan's resignation.
in a post on X, the opposition Congress party leader KC Venugopal appealed to Wangchuk to end his fast, while saying the party "share the anguish and outrage" over the "lack of accountability" within the Modi government and "for the collapse of the examination system in particular."
Welcome to our coverage!
Hello! This is Shakeel from DW's New Delhi Studio, bringing you the latest news from across India.
Activist Sonam Wangchuk is on the 20th day of a hunger strike in New Delhi, as the Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) demands the resignation of India's Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan over alleged exam irregularities.
Meanwhile, while the government assured the Delhi High Court that the activist's health would be monitored, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has remained silent on the issue. On Thursday, the Editors Guild of India criticized what it called Modi's "unwillingness to address unscripted press conferences," saying he had been reluctant to share his views on with the media.
Follow our blog today for live updates from the CJP protests at Jantar Mantar in New Delhi.