What you need to know
These updates have been closed. Thank you for joining us.
Here's a roundup of the biggest headlines from India on Friday, July 24:
- Activist Sonam Wangchuk ends hunger strike after 26 days
- Indian government held talks with Cockroach party leaders on Friday afternoon
- No breakthrough in talks but more dialogue expected Saturday, both sides say
- Prime Minister Narendra Modi appeals to protesting students in midnight video
- Security tightens in central Delhi, metro stations and internet shut again
- India's External Affairs Ministry condemns deadly attack on vessel in Black Sea, killing 1 Indian citizen
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
No breakthrough in CJP talks with government, as more dialogue to resume Saturday
There was no breakthrough in the talks between the CJP and the Indian government on Friday, with more dialogue expected to take place on Saturday.
The talks were convened with Indian federal ministers J.P. Nadda and Jitendra Singh representing the government. Saurav Das and Ashutosh Ranka, meanwhile, were representing the CJP in the discussions.
The Cockroach movement is demanding the resignation of Indian Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan over a medical exam leaks controversy.
"We conveyed in very clear terms that nothing short of Dharmendra Pradhan's resignation or his removal from the Union Cabinet would be acceptable," CJP spokesperson Ashutosh Ranka told journalists after talks in Delhi.
Nadda said the Indian government "heard their points" in the discussion with the CJP. The government is expected to respond to points made by the CJP in followup talks.
India's External Affairs Ministry condemns attack on vessel in Black Sea, killing 1 Indian national
India's Ministry of External Affairs condemned an attack on the commercial vessel MV OMORFI, which was transiting the Black Sea.
The statement said the MV OMORFI was reportedly in Russian territorial waters on July 18 when it was attacked.
"As per available information, one Indian national tragically lost his life in the attack," the statement said. "We extend our deepest condolences to the bereaved family of the deceased. The other two Indian nationals on board are reported to be safe."
The ministry said India "unequivocally condemns such attacks targeting commercial shipping and placing the lives of innocent civilian crew members at risk. It is a matter of serious concern that the freedom of navigation and international commerce is facing increasing threats."
It's unclear who was behind the attack, but it comes as fighting between Russia and Ukraine continues. India has played a neutral role in the war and has sought a diplomatic end to the conflict.
Protesters: 'We're not going anywhere'
As the sun began to set over the horizon, protesters at New Delhi's Jantar Mantar remained high in spirit and numbers. This is the 35th day of protest in central Delhi.
"The crowd has not ebbed or reduced, it is still packed here," DW's Shamayita Chakraborty said from the protest site.
Chakraborty described how a consistent stream of supporters, including political leaders and farm union leaders, met Cockroach Janta Party founder Abhijeet Dipke on the stage to express their solidarity.
"Students and protesters I spoke to said they have been told there might be another crackdown but they were resilient," she said. "They said 'We're not going anywhere.'"
Cabinet approves amendments to anti-paper leak bill: report
The Union Cabinet of India has approved amendments to the Prevention of Paper Leak Bill, which proposes tougher penalties for those involved in leaking question papers, the Times of India reported citing sources.
According to the report, the proposed law provides a maximum jail term of 10 years and a fine of up to Rs 10 crore (€907,000.)It also seeks to increase minimum imprisonment of those convicted of leaking papers, from the current three years to five years.
In a midnight video posted by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, he had mentioned the bill, saying his government would introduce the legislation in Parliament and attempt to have it passed.
Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party-led National democratic Alliance holds a clear majority in both the upper and lower houses of the Parliament.
What else is making headlines in India?
Several killed in Assam floods, 700,000 displaced
Flooding in India's northeastern state of Assam killed at over 40 people and displaced over 700,000 after days of heavy rainfall which overflowed the Brahmaputra river among others, officials reported.
French news agency AFP reported at least 50 people had been killed. Indian news agency PTI reported at least 47 had died.
The flood situation in Assam remained critical on Friday, with around 40 people still missing, Chief Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma said, warning that the toll might increase. He said that authorities were providing food and relief supplies to flood victims, including via airdrops from helicopters.
Overflowing water from rivers flooded Assam's villages, swept away homes and forced about 300,000 people into government-run relief camps, officials said. Some 900 villages were submerged in flood water and over 7,000 homes were without electricity.
US slaps 10% tariff on India over forced labor concerns
The United States has imposed a 10% tariffon goods imported from India and 16 other countries, over a month after a US Trade Representatives released a report on its investigations into countries importing goods allegedly made with forced labor.
"The United States has had a forced labor import ban for nearly a century, and rigorously enforces it; it's well past time for our trading partners to do the same," said US Trade Representative Jamieson Greer.
"Today's action will begin to correct what is both a human rights abuse and distortive trade practice to improve the welfare of workers everywhere," he added.
The new duties will take effect Friday just as a temporary 10% global tariff expires.
This comes as New Delhi and Washington have been negotiating the first tranche of a trade deal.
Protests 'rude awakening' for PM Modi, but not like Nepal, Bangladesh: Expert tells DW
To Michael Kugelman, author and South Asia expert, it had been clear for some time that there was a significant level of discontent among India's youth - something Prime Minister Narendra Modi seemingly missed.
"A lot of that has to do with perceptions about job markets. Youth unemployment has been a reality for India for quite some time. These current protests tap into that," he told DW's Shalu Yadav. "I would have hoped that the Prime Minister had noticed over the years," he said.
"This is something that at the very least will serve as a rude awakening to the Prime Minister for really putting him in a position where he has to recognize that there is a problem," Kugelman said.
That said, it is "highly unlikely" that the protests will lead to Modi's resignation or the government toppling down, as seen in India's neighbors over the last several years.
Nepal saw Gen Z-led protests in 2025 which ended with a new government in power this year. In 2024, Bangladesh's youth uprising ousted longtime Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina. In 2022, youth-led protests in Sri Lanka over corruption and severe economic collapse forced former President Gotabaya Rajapaksa and top officials to step down.
Kugelman said India's current protests were different, first because of the scale, second because the grievances are still largely limited to the education system, and lastly because of Modi's long-built popularity.
"While it's very clear that these protests have shown how many people are angry at Modi and the government, I would argue that Modi and this government more broadly continue to enjoy a fair amount of popularity, particularly relative to the governments that were ousted in mass movements elsewhere in the region in Bangladesh and Sri Lanka and Nepal over the last few years," he said.
Even still, there are some parallels to be drawn. "The fact that the police responded in the way that they did has really galvanized so many young people. And it was the same way in Bangladesh," he said.
Government seeks time on demand for education minister's resignation - CJP
The Indian government has sought time until Saturday afternoon to respond to the protesters' demand for Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan's resignation, a Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) spokespersons said.
Cockroach Janta Party spokespersons Saurav Das and Ashutosh Ranka met Union Ministers Jagat Prakash Nadda and Jitendra Singh a few miles away from the protest site on Friday afternoon. This was the first substantiative dialogue between both sides after a preliminary round was held on Monday.
Das told reporters that a second round of talks would take place on Saturday.
Ranka said that the government had signalled it had in principle accepted the CJP's other two demands - to provide families of students who committed suicide over the NEET-UG exam paper leaks and the withdrawal of legal action against peaceful protesters.
The CJP and protesting students said they remain firm on their demand for Pradhan's resignation.
The talks came hours after activist Sonam Wangchuk ended his 26-day hunger strike, raising hopes that the two sides could reach a breakthrough after tens of thousands of angry youth converged in the capital Delhi to demand the minister's resignation over exam paper leaks.
'Is this the price of protest in a democracy?': reports of police brutality
DW met injured protesters at Jantar Mantar in New Delhi, where students continue their sit-in days after clashes with police during demonstrations over the alleged leak of India's national medical entrance examination.
Dozens of students and protesters gathered around us to show their injuries - fractured legs, bandaged heads and bruises they say were sustained during the police crackdown.
Again and again, they asked the same question: "Is this the price of protest in a democracy?"
Among them was Lovekush Trujapati, one of thousands who defied a police ban to march towards parliament. He now has a fractured leg and damaged ligaments and can no longer walk without support.
"Whenever I move my leg, I feel immense pain. Sometimes I can't tolerate it, but I am fighting through the pain as a volunteer for this movement," he told us.
Lovekush alleges police beat him and other protesters with batons near Parliament Street. Delhi Police have denied allegations of using excessive force.
Despite his injuries, he says he has no intention of leaving the protest.
He is not alone - many of those hurt in the clashes have returned to the demonstration, saying they remain committed to the movement. Throughout the day, supporters travelled from different parts of the country to meet the injured protesters, thanking them for what they described as their courage and determination.
Students who spoke to DW said the violence had shaken their trust in the authorities and strengthened their calls for accountability over the alleged examination paper leak.
Watch the full report:
Delhi universities warn students to refrain for protests
The Jawaharlal Nehru University, one of the top universities in the country, advised its students to "refrain from participating in or visiting gatherings at or around Jantar Mantar," in a post on X on Friday.
The university said this was in accordance with the Supreme Court of India's directions on public demonstrations.
"Please exercise responsibility on social media. Violations may invite legal consequences under applicable laws as well as disciplinary action under the University's code of conduct," it said.
This came less than a day after the University of Delhi posted a similar advisory on social media.
"Please note that any unlawful assemblies or demonstrations at Jantar Mantar, New Delhi, which are strictly regulated as per the directives of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, may invite legal action. Such activities can also pose serious risks to students' personal safety and significantly impact their academic progress and professional opportunities," it said on X.
Jantar Mantar is a historical ground in central Delhi where "cockroaches" - student protesters and their supporters - have been gathered for over a month now.
Opposition leader Rahul Gandhi slammed Delhi University's warning, saying: "How dare you threaten students for exercising their democratic rights? Please note, you are the ones that will be held accountable when the time comes."
'Nothing short of the minister's resignation is acceptable': CJP Founder Dipke says
Even as the Cockroach party leaders and the Indian government were scheduled for talks on Friday, the nationwide protests would not stop, said CJP Founder Abhijeet Dipke. He made the comments to news agency PTI on Friday afternoon.
"Nothing short of the minister's resignation is acceptable. The protest will not be called off because this movement is no longer about Abhijeet Dipke or Sonam Wangchuk alone," he said.
"It has now become a movement of the country's youth, which is why protests are being held across the nation. Nothing less than the minister's resignation will be accepted," he said.
What's happening at the protest site now?
Bollywood weighs in on India's youth movement
Politics and Bollywood have generally had a one-way relationship. Several popular stars have turned into members of parliament or revealed their political leanings after peaking their on-screen careers. But not many have expressed their opinions on national politics unless it is in polite gratitude of the ruling government.
With millions of protesters taking to Indian streets, many have now spoken up - some in support of the students' right to protest, and some urging them to trust the government.
Here's what some of the biggest voices of Bollywood had to say:
Salman Khan
"The Honorable Prime Minister has tweeted, and I am sure that he will take strict action against all those people who are responsible for this leak. So students, plz go back to your parents n homes," he said in a post on X, referring to Modi's assurance that those involved in paper leaks would be swiftly punished.
Kareena Kapoor Khan
"I've sat with this for a few days but I can't sit with it any longer... education only works if children believe in it. And they stop believing the Moment they suspect that honesty, hard work and merit don't actually count," the actress said on Instagram. "When an entire generation speaks with one voice about its own future, listening isn't a courtesy we extend. It's an obligation we owe them," she said.
Imran Khan
"From the millions of students whose honest efforts were invalidated with barely a shrug; to the millions more who stood up and continue to stand against injustice...I see you," Khan said on Insgram. He was also seen at the protest march in Mumbai on Wednesday. "You raise your Voices for the best in us, and it's my Honor to stand beside you," he said.
Alia Bhatt
Praising the students for their courage and determination, Bhatt wrote, "Their courage humbles me. Their resolve is a mirror held up to all of us, asking whether we are truly listening to the very people who will inherit and shape this country's tomorrow. For the students. By the students. The future is theirs Jai Hind."
Some actors, such as Naseeruddin Shah, Shabana Azmi and Huma Qureshi have attended protests in their cities as well.
WATCH: Cockroach movement protesters want Modi's resignation
Student protests over alleged exam paper leaks in India have intensified after a police crackdown in New Delhi.
Demonstrators are demanding the resignation of Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan, while some are even calling on Prime Minister Narendra Modi to step down.
What began as a campaign against exam fraud has expanded into a broader movement highlighting concerns over corruption, unemployment and accountability.
DW's Shalu Yadav reports:
Delhi authorities tighten security ahead of talks
Even as the Indian government and protest organizers are scheduled to meet for dialogue, authorities are tightening security in central Delhi which is home to both the Indian parliament, and the youth protest site.
The New Delhi Metro Rail Corporation announced that 17 metro station around the are would be closed on Friday morning until further notice. Not just students and protesters, but also office goers rely on the speedy Delhi metro for their daily commute.
The thousands who have reached the protest site are being heavily monitored.
News outlet Indian Express reported that Delhi police were using two highly-equipped surveillance vans to keep a 360-degree eye on the protest site and protesters. As per the report, a senior Delhi police officer said they were using live facial recognition to identify any known criminals.
Fearing unwarranted action, several protesters have been covering their faces with regular and sometimes superhero masks.
Parliament disrupted over education minister's resignation
The protests are not limited to the streets: inside the Indian parliament, opposition parties continue to protest against the NEET paper leak issue for the fifth day.
Both the upper and lower houses of parliament have been adjourned till noon over the disruption.
Yesterday, the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party's (BJP) leaders said they were willing to discuss the issue in parliament. However, opposition leaders demand that Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan be sacked before any discussion takes place.
Activist Sonam Wangchuk ended his weeks-long hunger strike on the assurance that the government would discuss the paper leaks issue on the parliament floor.