What you need to know
This blog is now closed. Here's a roundup of the biggest stories hitting the headlines in Germany on Wednesday, August 12, 2026:
- Cabinet approved reforms to the foreign and domestic intelligence agencies amid rising hybrid threats
- Transport ministers are set to discuss possible measures as river cargo shipping is hampered by low water levels
- The military reports a large increase in drone overflights of sensitive sites in recent years
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Partial solar eclipse draws crowds across Germany
Millions of people across Germany have watched a partial solar eclipse, with largely clear skies offering good views as the moon covered around 85% to 90% of the sun.
Large crowds gathered at parks, observatories and viewpoints around the country, while many others stopped to watch from streets, balconies and open spaces.
In Munich, large numbers of people gathered in the Olympic Park to watch the eclipse.
Hundreds also headed to the Großer Feldberg in the central state of Hesse, while in Berlin around 3,000 people gathered near the planetarium in Prenzlauer Berg, according to police. The crowds caused some traffic disruption.
In the eastern city of Dresden, at least six hot-air balloons were spotted above the city, giving passengers an elevated view of the event.
Germany was outside the path of totality, but the moon still obscured around 85% to 90% of the sun in much of the country.
The weather largely cooperated, with mostly cloudless skies providing good viewing conditions.
Authorities had warned people not to look directly at the sun without certified eclipse glasses. Demand for eclipse glasses had surged ahead of the event, with shops reporting strong interest.
World War II bomb disposal prompts Monheim am Rhein evacuation
An unexploded British bomb from World War II has prompted authorities to clear out a 600-meter area around Monheim am Rhein.
They were hoping to dispose of the five-hundredweight bomb on Wednesday evening. It was discovered on a business' property on Daimlerstrasse, not far from the Rhine.
"Because of a clockwork delay fuse located on the bomb, defusing it is not possible," town authorities said in a press release on the operation. "Therefore the bomb must be detonated in a controlled explosion."
Clockwork or mechanical delay fuses were used in the war to hinder firefighting and emergency recovery operations; they were designed to make a number of the bombs dropped explode only some time after landing, effectively targeting the firefighting and rescue crews dispatched to the scene.
Authorities posted a map showing a 600-meter-radius (roughly 2,000-feet) exclusion zone covering much of the northern half of the town center and a stretch of the Rhine River's right bank. They said around 2,600 people were affected, with some roads closed and shipping on the already-almost-impassable Rhine restricted.
Shortly before 8 p.m., they said that the area was cleared and the controlled detonation operation had begun.
Monheim is a town of just over 40,000 people, on the banks of the Rhine in western Germany between Cologne and Düsseldorf.
German team wins dressage World Championship gold in Aachen
Germany's dominant equestrian dressage team has added another World Championship gold to their tally at the 2026 FEI championships in Aachen.
Record-breaking rider Isabell Werth rode the fourth and final routine for the German team, scoring almost 80%.
Werth, 57, now has 10 World Championship golds to her name, along with her eight Olympic golds and six silvers spread across seven separate Games.
The German team beat Great Britain to gold by less than four percentage points, with Denmark in third position, two further adrift.
"That was super," Werth exclaimed after her run. "We really had a great team performance here."
Coach Monica Theodorecu praised all four riders for their performance on ARD public television.
After a particularly impressive ride from Katharina Hemmer and consistent scores from the entire team, the coach remarked that Werth "can now have a relaxed ride" in the final run - with Germany enjoying a comfortable lead going into the last ride. "She can do it very well under pressure, too," Hemmer said of her veteran teammate.
Bundesliga's '50+1 rule' can comply with antitrust laws, cartel office says
The Federal Cartel Office, or Bundeskartellamt, has said that the Bundesliga's famous "50+1 rule" need not breach German competition laws - particularly if it is applied in a "consequential" manner without any "factually unjustified exceptions."
The rule stipulates that a majority stake (50% of shares, plus one) of most football teams should be owned by the underlying club - and, by extension, the club's members and fans.
It's beloved by many in Germany and seen as a key guarantor of the league's authenticity, its comparatively affordable ticket prices and other fan-oriented considerations. But critics say it's a financial millstone weighing the league down, a reason German teams sometimes struggle to go toe to toe with the richest clubs in Europe.
Federal Cartel Office President, Andreas Mundt, said his organization's position on the rule was fundamentally unchanged since the last time it was asked to opine.
"The 50+1 rule can continue to be justified with the goal of securing teams' identites and ensuring the involvement of the membership," Mundt said. "The condition for this, however, is that it [the rule] is applied consequentially and without any factually unjustified exceptions."
Mundt also stressed in the statement that his office was neither conducting, nor even considering "an investigation that could ban the 50+1 rule." Instead, he said that the German Football League (DFL), which runs the professional Bundesliga competitions, had requested "a well-founded assessment of this complex issue under sports antitrust law."
What are the complexities and possible inconsistencies in the rule?
One condition Mundt recommended was ensuring open access to all clubs for members and fans - which could be a nod to the Red Bull-owned RB Leipzig to open up for members.
He also said there was "room for improvement" in the proposed new regulations for the existing "sponsor clubs" with 50+1 exceptions.
That's a reference to Bayer Leverkusen and Wolfsburg - factory-owned clubs dating back decades belonging to chemicals giant Bayer and to Volkswagen in Wolfsburg - that are exempt from the model because of their roots. Hoffenheim used to enjoy a similar status but moved to meet the 50+1 ownership model as of 2023.
Hannover 96's patron Martin Kind, meanwhile, recently requested an exemption from the model but failed in 2018.
Bayern Munich's President Herbert Hainer controversially argued this year that the rule should be scrapped and each team should be free to decide its own ownership structure. Audi, Allianz and Adidas combine to hold a 25% stake in Bayern, while the club's 380,000 members own a 75% share. Counterintuitively, Hainer argued that scrapping the rule could enable other teams to better challenge Bayern's dominance.
E.ON CEO warns of potential attacks on Germany's power grid
E.ON's chief executive has warned that Germany's energy grid could be attacked.
Presenting the German energy giant's German energy giant half-yearly report, Leonhard Birnbaum said, "the most attractive target is the extra-high-voltage grid operated by transmission system operators and E.ON's 110,000-volt network."
The CEO of E.ON, Germany's largest electricity provider and grid operator, called for security measures to be improved.
He pointed out that while he believes the state should do more to protect Germany's power grid, the notion of total protection from sabotage acts is "illusory."
"We can ensure that it is not easy, but we cannot guarantee that it is impossible to attack us," Birnbaum said.
His comments come after a drone laden with explosives was found at the airport in the eastern city of Leipzig.
"We are currently unable to secure the airports in Germany. How could I possibly tell you that we have all our many hundreds of distributed distribution network points under control? That is, of course, not the case," said Birnbaum.
Cologne Cathedral association 'overloaded' by wave of applicants avoiding new entry fees
Cologne Cathedral's new entry fee has led to a boom in membership applications for the longstanding ZDV association - a voluntary club for supporters of the cathedral and the costs accrued maintaining it.
Since July 1, visitors to the famous twin-towered cathedral overlooking the Rhine have been asked to pay €12 (just under $14) per head, per visit.
People visiting specifically to pray rather than as "tourists" can claim access to a small area via a side entrance for free, but not to the main chamber of the building.
But there's another workaround that several regulars are taking advantage of.
Members of the ZDV are allowed free entry to the UNESCO World Heritage Site. And joining costs a minimum fee of €20 per year, with people welcome to voluntarily donate higher sums.
The ZDV's President Barabara Schock-Werner told the domradio.de website that the group was currently working through a backlog of 1,400 new applications - of 10,000 since the fees were introduced. Typically, she said, they would receive perhaps 20 applications per week.
Schock-Werner said that even after hiring a new staff member part time, they were still "quite overloaded."
She also said the wave of applications could potentially become a financial burden, rather than bolstering the coffers. Most new applicants were paying the minimum €20 fee, she said, whereas in the past members tended to contribute €50 or €100.
"I am going to have to work on that," she said. "I can only say clearly: Heartfelt greetings, I'm pleased by every new member. But maybe ask yourself whether the Cathedral is not also worth €50 to you."
She said the ZDV would not raise the fees, as it wanted to allow people of minimal means to join, but that it did appeal to new applicants to consider giving more if they could, because "if it becomes too many, then it could get quite difficult financially."
Interior minister hails 'new era' for Germany's secret services
Germany's Interior Minister Alexander Dobrindt has praised newly approved measures that give the country's intelligence services new, broad powers.
The reforms, which we reported on earlier in blog, will give Germany's domestic and foreign intelligence services more scope in gathering and storing information and data, as well as operational powers to fight acts of sabotage and hacking attempts.
The German government says the reforms are needed to allow the country to better combat the growing threat from cyber and hybrid attacks, particularly - but not exclusively - from Russia.
"We are transforming our intelligence services into genuine secret services," Dobrindt told a press conference in Berlin on Wednesday, adding that the new measures, which include artificial intelligence tools, will "revolutionize Germany's security architecture."
Germany's intelligence services were set up after the end of World War II, when memories of the Nazi regime were still recent, while people in the former East Germany lived under the oppression and intense state surveillance of the notorious secret state police, known as the Stasi.
Because of that legacy, Dobrindt said Germany was "catching up with what is possible in other European countries" such as France or the UK, whose secret services have more and broader powers.
Rhine water level sinks further, stranding cargo vessels
The water level in the Rhine River has fallen further amid the current heat wave, with German companies reporting increasing disruption to their supply and operations as cargo shipping is reduced or blocked.
The inland navigation agency WSV said the gauge at Kaub near Koblenz measured 12 cm (4.72 inches) on Wednesday, down from 15 cm on Tuesday.
It is well below the previous lowest recorded level of 25 cm in 2018.
The measurement indicates that the river at Kaub is now about 112 cm deep at its deepest point.
The low water at this chokepoint means that most vessels cannot pass through Kaub from either direction, effectively cutting the Rhine in two for commercial shipping.
Traders have told the Reuters news agency that sailings on northern sections of the river continue but are often only 20% full.
The Rhine is one of Europe's main arteries for transporting grains, fuels, minerals and manufactured goods.
Rights group files criminal complaint over Mega's AI glasses
A German digital rights group, HateAid, has lodged a criminal complaint against Meta and companies that sell Meta's "smart" glasses in Germany.
HateAid said in a statement that putting the glasses - which can record audio and video - on the market broke digital privacy laws.
"There's no place to escape from smart glasses. You have to expect at any moment to be filmed and then exposed on the Internet," said HateAid managing director Josephine Ballon.
The group said its complaint was based on a federal digital data protection law banning the sale of communication devices that can film people without their being aware of it.
Germany's digital communications regulator, the Federal Network Agency, issued a statement on smart glasses in late 2023, saying that connected devices for covert audio or video recordings were banned.
The glasses have earned the online sobriquet of "pervert glasses," with many fearing they could be used to take video particularly of unsuspecting women or children that is then turned into content of a sexual or hateful nature on the Internet.
Inflation rises to 2.8% as energy prices jump
Germany's inflation rate rose to 2.8% in July, a rise caused mainly by an increase in energy prices after a fuel tax relief scheme expired, the Federal Statistical Office (Destatis) confirmed on Wednesday.
The figure is up 5 percentage points on the inflation rate in June.
"Energy prices continued to rise at an above-average rate and thus remained the central driver of inflation," said Destatis head Ruth Brand.
In July, consumers paid 8.3% more for fuel and heating than a year earlier, compared with an increase of just 3.4% in June.
In May and June, the government had cut energy taxes on petrol and diesel by just under €0.17 ($0.20) per liter as the US war with Iran drove oil prices up.
With the scheme expired, gasoline now costs more than €2 (2.31) a liter in most places.
The oil price shock was the key driver in pushing the April inflation rate to 2.9%, the highest since January 2024.
Food prices, for their part, have seen only moderate rises over the past months. In July, they were 0.4% above the same month a year earlier, matching the two preceding months.
Economists say, however, that food prices are likely to rise more sharply as the high energy prices make transport, refrigeration and storage are all currently more expensive.
Heat and drought are also negatively impacting agriculture and could reduce harvests.
No accompanied drinking for 14-year-olds, Cabinet decides
The German Cabinet also on Wednesday approved a draft bill abolishing a previous law allowing 14- and 15-year-olds to buy and drink beer, wine or sparkling wine when accompanied by their parents or guardians.
According to the bill, the current exception to the general ban on under 16-year-olds drinking any form of alcohol "weakens the protection of young people from the considerable health and social consequences of alcohol consumption."
In Germany, under 14-year-olds are currently not allowed to buy or drink alcohol in any form, while 14-15-year olds are permitted to purchase and drink undistilled alcohol in public places in the company of their parents or legal guardians.
From the age of 16, people are permitted to buy and consume undistilled alchohol without accompaniment, while those aged 18 and over, as legal adults, can buy and consume all alcoholic beverages.
Cabinet approves child pension subsidy
Among the draft bills approved by the Cabinet on Wednesday is a plan for children from the age of 6 to receive €10 ($11.54) from the state every month for a pension deposit .
Under the plan, the child's parents or carers would open the account and be able to deposit money there themselves as well.
The state payments would continue until the child turns 18.
Pension payments from the account would flow only after the now-adult turns 65.
According to the Finance Ministry, the state subsidies would amount to around €2,200, which "could become around €53,000 by pensionable age without any additional payments."
With the plan, the government aims not only to guarantee better financial security in old age for the younger generation but also to educate it in financial matters.
"Someone who experiences the capital market already at a young age and has positive experiences with it develops an understanding of long-term investment and will tend to invest in the capital market during his or her life," the Finance Ministry said.
The bill still needs approval by both chambers of parliament to go into force.
Cabinet passes controversial intelligence agency reform
The German Cabinet has approved a more than 700-page package of laws granting much greater powers to both the domestic intelligence agency (BfV) and the foreign intelligence agency (BND).
The package will allow the agencies more latitude in the gathering and storage of information and data, along with new options to actively combat acts of sabotage and hacking attacks.
The government says the package aims to enable the agencies to operate more effectively in the face of a myriad of hybrid security threats.
"We will not look on passively as foreign interference, sabotage and threats to the pillars of our constitution and our free society continue to grow," chancellery head Nina Warken told the daily Rheinische Post.
"Our [intelligence] services can only take targeted action against these hybrid attacks if they have more liberties and up-to-date measures" at their disposal, she said.
However, the planned reform has also met with considerable criticism from those who see the extended powers as a threat to civil rights.
The leader of the Free Democrats (FDP), Wolfgang Kubicki, accused Interior Minister Alexander Dobrindt of "breaking a taboo."
"It can hardly be imagined that the Constitutional Court will not intervene here," he told the Augsburger Allgemeine daily.
"I do not want any secret police in Germany," he said. "I want full court control in the case of attacks on basic rights and a state that understands that you don't defend liberty by curbing it."
Ansah has 'no fear' of losing bronze despite looming doping ban
Sprinter Owen Ansah, Germany's 100-meter record holder, delivered his country's first men's 100-meter European Championship medal in 40 years, despite facing a potential doping suspension.
Ansah won the bronze at the European Championships in Birmingham, England on Tuesday night, to take the biggest win of his career.
The 25-year-old posted a time of 10.19 seconds, managing to shut out the considerable noise surrounding his looming suspension by Germany's National Anti Doping Agency (NADA), which accuses the sprinter of refusing to take a doping test on July 9.
But Ansah insists that he failed to provide a urine sample because the doping control officer arrived outside of the requested time slot and Ansah had to leave to travel to Monaco for a Diamond League event. He also says he had just used the restroom before the officer arrived.
He said he is "not afraid" of having his medal revoked. "I trust my team, which has my back. I can't influence the other stuff. I can only influence how fast I am on the track. And I showed that well today," Ansah said.
The sprinter is now turning his attention to the 200-meter dash on Friday, where he is eyeing a second medal at the Championships.
Drone-related security incidents on the increase - military
Several hundred security incidents involvingdrones have been registered by Germany's armed forces in the past years, a military spokesman has said.
"Since the start of the illegal full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, reports on drone sightings affecting the Bundeswehr have greatly increased," the spokesman told the media outlet Redaktionsnetzwerk Deutschland.
"Over the past few years, several hundred suspected drone overflights in Bundeswehr-related areas have been reported," he said, adding that whole swarms of drones had been sighted on occasion.
Germany has seen a number of drone incidents in recent weeks, including one involving a drone carrying explosives at the Leipzig-Halle airport.
According to the newsmagazine Spiegel, the Hannover-Langenhagen airport was also closed several times overnight to Tuesday after a drone was sighted by employees.
Spiegel reported that the drone did not show up on police detection devices, suggesting that the object was possibly not a commercially available model.