The co-pilot accused of stabbing his captain during Flydubai Flight 1073 was wielding a crash ax and attempted to carry out a "terrorist attack," UAE investigators said Saturday, according to Emirati state news agency WAM.
A crash ax is typically stored in the plane's cockpit for use in case of an emergency.
Western and Gulf officials cited by Reuters and AP news agencies named the co-pilot as Omani national Hamam al-Hammami. Emirati authorities have not publicly commented on his identity.
The Wall Street Journal reported on Friday that he had been barred from flying by Oman over concerns that he had adopted radical ideological views.
What happened on the Flydubai flight?
The attack that took place on a flight from Dubai to Tel Aviv has raised many questions about how the incident unfolded as well as about background checks in aviation hiring.
There were 182 people on board, including four pilots.
After the co-pilot stabbed the captain in an apparent attempt to crash the plane, two other pilots in the cabin took control and landed the aircraft safely in Tabuk, Saudi Arabia.
Anwar Gargash, an Emirati presidential adviser, referred to the Flydubai incident on X, saying the latest "terrorist operation" showed the Mideast region's "fight against extremism continues."
Flydubai co-pilot was barred from flying by Oman over security concerns
The Wall Street Journal report said the co-pilot was hired by Flydubai despite the ban by Oman, allowing him to fly the jet on a sensitive route connecting the UAE and Israel.
Israel and the UAE, which includes Dubai, signed the Abraham Accords normalizing relations in 2020.
The newspaper said it could not be determined whether Oman shared concerns about the pilot's radicalization with other countries or airlines.
The nature of his radicalization was also not clear.
US broadcaster CNN cited two sources saying the co-pilot was removed from a job at Oman's national airline last year over concerns about extremist views.
Saudi broadcaster Al Arabiya, also citing an informed source, reported that Omani authorities determined that the co-pilot held extremist views.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Thursday in a video statement that they know the co-pilot "underwent Islamist radical indoctrination" and intended to crash the jet.
Netanyahu also said they were also looking into whether the co-pilot had acted under anyone's direction, warning that whoever was involved would pay a "heavy price."
The investigation is ongoing. A Gulf diplomat, in comments to AP, said authorities were attempting to find out whether the Omani co-pilot was a "lone wolf or has any connection with any extremist groups."
If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google so you'll always see our verified news first.
Edited by: Sean Sinico and Natalie Muller