What you need to know
- India's Cockroach Janta Party movement has urged supporters to march to the Indian Parliament peacefully
- Protesters and police clash as protesters are trying to make their way to parliament
- Outside of the protest site, police has prohibited protest marches, processions, demonstrations and assemblies of five or more people
- The protest, led by young Indians, is calling for the resignation of India's education minister over exam paper leaks
Here are the latest developments from India on Monday, June 20:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Delhi youth protest: What is happening on the ground?
A police official has told DW's Shalu Yadav that over 100,000 people have descended on the streets of the Indian capital for the protest.
"The protest is not showing any signs of abating," Yadav reports, adding that people are angry and trying to break the barricades.
Yadav also reports that some people have been injured in the ensuing chaos.
Indian media reports say that some protesters and police personnel have been injured in clashes between demonstrators and security forces.
Police use tear gas to disperse protesters, say reports
Police fired tear gas after protesters tried to breach security barricades to march on to the parliament in New Delhi, media reports said on Monday afternoon.
"Stop using tear gas on the youth in front of the Parliament. Choose the path of dialogue instead of repression.," the Cockroach Janta Party said on X, sharing a video purportedly showing tear gas fired at the protesters.
Opposition demands parliament discussion on medical exam leaks, criticize use of force on protesters
Both houses of the Indian parliament were adjourned until 2 p.m. local time as lawmakers face a challenging first day back at work for the monsoon session.
Hundreds of youth protesters are trying to reach the parliament, demanding that India's education minister steps down.
Leaders from opposition parties have also shown solidarity with the movement kickstarted by the viral Cockroach Janta Party.
On Monday, the Samajwadi Party (SP) protested in the parliament complex to demand a discussion on the medical exam paper leaks that sparked the youth outcry. Some of the party's MPs were seen holding banners with "paper leak" written on them.
Speaking to the media, party chief Akhilesh Yadav accused Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party government of ignoring the students' issues.
After visuals showed security forces baton-charging protesters, Yadav described the action as "disheartening".
Speaking to the media, he called on youth members of the SP wanting to go to the Jantar Mantar protest site to carry the party's message to demonstrators that "we stand with you".
Congress MP Shashi Tharoor also criticized police action.
"When a non-violent protest is taking place, what is the reason for a lathi (baton) charge?" he said while talking to Indian news agencies.
CJP says in talks with government amid protest
The Modi government has reached out for talks with the Cockroach Janta Party, the protest movement's chief spokesperson Saurav Das said on X.
Das said that he and Ashutosh Ranka, another spokesperson, were on their way to meet federal Health Minister JP Nadda.
"The government had reached out for talks in the morning. Our demands are clear. The youth has gathered in huge numbers," Das said speaking of the youth protest that has gripped the capital.
There was no immediate statement from the government on the talks.
Lok Sabha adjourned until noon
While riot police baton-charged protesters marching to parliament, opposition lawmakers inside the legislative body's lower house demanded a discussion on the medical entrance exam leaks.
As opposition MPs raised slogans, the Lok Sabha was adjourned until noon shortly after it commenced proceedings on Monday, marking the first day of the parliament's monsoon session.
IN PICTURES - Youth protest in heart of New Delhi faces massive security
Protesters clash with police as they try to reach parliament
Police used sticks and batons to disperse the hundred of youth protesters attempting to march to the parliament from Jantar Mantar on Monday, reports said.
Visuals shared by news agency ANI showed security personnel in riot gear facing off with crowds of protesters, some of whom were carrying the Indian national flag.
Several people can be seen being hit by the police and deterred from pushing through the heavy security deployment.
There was no immediate statement from India's security forces.
DW's Shalu Yadav reported that as police personnel tried closing in on the protesters, the huge crowds pushed them back from the opposite side.
Hunger strike continues, activist Sonam Wangchuk says from hospital
The month-long Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) demonstration at Jantar Mantar drew wider focus after Indian climate activist Sonam Wangchuk, who started a hunger strike in support of the protest on June 28, was forcibly removed by the police on Saturday and taken to a hospital.
For 21 days, 59-year-old Wangchuk's resolve gripped the nation as he appeared visibly weaker with the passing days, lying down on the stage at Jantar Mantar surrounded by young protesters.
Modi remained silent on the hunger strike, inviting criticism as several opposition leaders expressed solidarity with Wangchuk.
CJP founder Abhijeet Dipke began his own hunger protest after Wangchuk was taken away, and called for the prime minister's resignation.
On Saturday, police forces climbed onto the stage and blocked the view to Wangchuk with white bedsheets as they whisked him away.
Police said they were acting on court orders and expert medical advice.
Thousands of supporters arrived at Jantar Mantar over the weekend in the aftermath of Wangchuk's removal from the protest site.
On Monday, Wangchuk said that he would end his fast if the government takes accountability for the education system's failures or if the CJP march is allowed to reach the parliament and lawmakers give assurances that the issue will be taken up in the house.
"Notwithstanding my health, my fast continues till (sic) after the Sansad Chalo March, and will be broken only under the following circumstances," the activist wrote on X, sharing a handwritten note listing his demands from the hospital.
What is the cockroach movement demanding?
"Delhi is filled with cockroaches now," CJP founder Abhijeet Dipke declared to a huge crowd of supporters gathered at New Delhi's Jantar Mantar on Monday.
The last month has marked a turning point in the Cockroach Janta Party's journey from an online satirical movement to becoming the biggest public challenge to Prime Minister Narendra Modi in his third stint as the country's leader.
The collective was formed in May after India's Chief Justice Surya Kant reportedly likened some unemployed young people to "cockroaches" and "parasites", sparking outrage on social media.
The controversial remarks inspired the name 'Cockroach Janta Party' - a play on Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).
The viral movement soon tapped into the nerve of youth discontent in the country, moving to India's streets.
Since June 20, the youth protest party has been holding a sit-in demonstration in the national capital asking India's Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan to step down.
The youth ire against Pradhan comes after repeated leaks of test materials in crucial entrance exams for medical colleges and government jobs.
The protestors are also demanding compensation for the families of students who took their own lives following the paper leaks, which forced a postponement of the high-stakes exam.
Over 2 million students had to retake the country's highly competitive medical entrance exam last month, following the scandal.
What is happening at Jantar Mantar now?
DW's Shalu Yadav who is on the ground at Jantar Mantar, reports that hundreds, if not thousands, of police, and paramilitary security forces have deployed.
She describes the protest site as a fortress now, surrounded by multi layer police barricading.
"As I walk in I can hear the deep hum of slogans in the air," Yadav reports.
The police is repeatedly broadcasting on loudspeakers, asking protesters to move inside Jantar Mantar.
"But there's no space inside. Crowds swelled out way beyond the barricades," Yadav says.
Meanwhile, the roads leading up to the protest venue are lined with riot vehicles.
She also reports that the internet speed at the site is slow.
CJP makes preparations for 'Chalo Sansad' march, police says no permission
India's Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) on Monday morning appeared to go on with its plans for the "Chalo Sansad" march to the parliament in New Delhi despite a denial of permission from the police, risking a standoff.
The protest movement - which is demanding the resignation of Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan over a major test paper leak fiasco - has called on the hundreds of supporters expected to join the march to carry out "a peaceful and disciplined protest"
The march comes on the first day of the Indian Parliament's monsoon session.
On Sunday evening, the Delhi Police denied the youth-led protest permission to march.
Prohibitory orders have been imposed in the New Delhi district, barring the gathering of five or more people, except at the designated protest site of Jantar Mantar where protestors have pitched a camp since June 20.
"Delhi Police hereby categorically clarifies that no permission has been sought or granted for any such protest march/procession," a public advisory said.
"As Parliament session is commencing from 20 July, strict security arrangements are in place to ensure public safety, security of protectees, and the protection of vital government installations," the police said, adding that any violations of its order would be liable for legal action.
On Monday, CJP's founder Abhijeet Dipke hailed the Indian constitution in a social media post.
Late on Sunday evening, Dipke shared a video message on Instagram saying that the success of the march lies in it being peaceful and called on protesters to carry roses, pictures of Mahatma Gandhi - the symbol of India's non-violent freedom movement - or the Indian constitution book.
Welcome to our coverage
This is Dharvi Vaid Dhulia from DW's studio in New Delhi, bringing you our Monday edition of the India news blog, where we give you a round up of all the biggest headlines making a buzz in the country.
The skies over New Delhi are leaden with rain clouds but the only rumbling being heard this morning is a political one echoing through the power corridor of the Indian capital.
The youth-led Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) movement is gearing up to march to the parliament where lawmakers are convening for the first day of the supreme legislative body's monsoon session.
The protesters seek the resignation of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's education minister over exam irregularities amid a slew of paper leaks.
The movement gained a fresh impetus over the weekend after prominent activist Sonam Wangchuk - who had been on a hunger strike to back the demand - was forcibly removed from the Jantar Mantar observatory and taken to a hospital. Jantar Mantar is a popular site in India for demonstrations.
The Delhi Police has said that no permission has been sought or given for any such protest march, issuing prohibitory orders.
Meanwhile, the CJP seems to be going ahead with its plans for the march.
Stay tuned as we bring you more.