What you need to know
- India beat Sri Lanka by 72 runs in the final in Dubai on Sunday
- The team skipped the trophy presentation with Mohsin Naqvi, Pakistan's interior minister
- China reduced forces along India border last year, says Defense Ministry report
Here is a roundup of some of the top headlines from across India on Monday, September 14:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
CJP supports 10-year ban on lawmakers who defect parties for money
The Cockroach Janta Party (CJP) on Monday threw its support behind senior lawyer and former Congress minister Kapil Sibal's call for a 10-year ban on lawmakers who defect from one political party to another after being elected, if the defection is carried out for money or under pressure.
Saurav Das, CJP co-convenor, said this aligned with CJP's first demand charter released by founder Abhijeet Dipke, which called for a much stricter punishment of a 20-year ban from "holding any public office and contesting elections."
According to Das, political defections, including allegedly bribing lawmakers with large sums of money to topple elected governments "is a fraud committed on the country."
"Such fraud should never happen," Das wrote on X.
Das also called for reform of India's anti-defection law, arguing that it is outdated and has been misused by the Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).
WATCH: How India has become Russia's trade lifeline
The war in Ukraine reshaped trade between India and Russia. Oil still dominates, but Indian companies are gaining ground in a wider range of sectors.
After devastating floods, India approves electricity exports to Nepal till December
India has approved electricity exports to Nepal for up to 18 hours a day until December 31, after devastating floods destroyed more than 12 hydropower plants and wiped out about a tenth of the neighboring country's generation capacity.
"The approval will help Nepal meet its power requirements during this difficult period and further strengthen the close and longstanding energy cooperation between India and Nepal," India's Power Ministry said on Monday.
The floods, triggered by a glacier collapse, killed nearly 1,400 people in Nepal and Tibet, while more than 5,300 people, including about 900 hydropower workers, remain missing.
Almost all of Nepal's electricity is supplied by hydropower plants. Following the floods, Nepal has stopped electricity exports and said it would import power from India to cover shortages.
China reduced forces along India border last year, says Defense Ministry report
India said the deployment of Chinese forces along the northern border fell significantly in 2025, as increased diplomatic engagements between India and China contributed to greater stability along the disputed border.
The annual report of the Ministry of Defense said Indian Army deployments across all sectors of the Line of Actual Control (LAC) remained "robust," even as about 10 Chinese combined-arms brigade-sized formations remained deployed along the LAC.
The thaw in ties came as Prime Minister Narendra Modi visited China for the Shanghai Cooperation Organization summit in Tianjin in August last year, while a senior military-level meeting between Beijing and New Delhi was held in October, the report said.
Meanwhile, the report also said the security situation in Jammu and Kashmir remained "firmly under control," with violence, protests and stone-pelting incidents declining, according to the ministry.
The report also mentioned the military conflict between the nuclear-armed neighbors India and Pakistan last year, saying that New Delhi has undertaken a comprehensive review of military capability gaps, with a focus on "force restructuring, enhancing jointness and integrating emerging technologies."
Asia Cup win ends with India trophy snub of Pakistan minister
Once again, political acrimony between India and Pakistan spilled out onto the cricket field as India's women's team refused to accept the Asia Cup trophy from Asian Cricket Council (ACC) president Mohsin Naqvi, who also happens to be Pakistan's interior minister.
The incident is a stark replay of the Asia Cup controversy from last year, when India's men's team also skipped the prize ceremony with Naqvi after defeating archrival Pakistan in the Asia Cup finals.
On Sunday, India beat Sri Lanka by 72 runs in the final in Dubai, winning a record-extending eight continental titles.
However, the team did not attend the trophy presentation with Naqvi, also the chairman of the Pakistan Cricket Board.
The ceremony was delayed by nearly an hour before ending abruptly after Naqvi presented the runners-up medals to the Sri Lankan team.
Indian officials instead conducted their own medal presentation for the champions.
"That stand has been taken by BCCI (India's cricket board) and we stand by it," India coach Amol Muzumdar told reporters. "For us, this tournament is over, we are the champions. That's good enough."
India and Pakistan, who last year engaged in a military conflict that threatened to turn into a full-blown war, avoid bilateral cricket series and only meet in international tournaments.
On Sunday, India dominated the final after scoring 183-5, with Smriti Mandhana scoring 59 and Shafali Verma 68. Spinner Shree Charani then took 4-20 as Sri Lanka were bowled out for 111.
Welcome to our coverage!
Hello!
This is Shakeel from DW's New Delhi studio, bringing you the top headlines from across India.
Stop me if you've heard this before - an Indian cricket team wins a cup and refuses to accept it from the Asian Cricket Council's chief, Mohsin Naqvi, who also happens to be Pakistan's interior minister.
This happened with India's women's cricket team after they won the Asia Cup on Sunday.
The exact same scenario played out last year following India's victory over Pakistan in the men's Asia Cup final, when the Indian team refused to accept the trophy from Naqvi.
Meanwhile, on the other side of the border, according to a statement by India's Ministry of Defense, China significantly reduced its troop presence along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) with India last year, as Beijing and New Delhi continue their diplomatic engagement.
For all this and more, follow our live blog.