The United Arab Emirates' chief prosecutor's office said on Thursday that it had ordered an investigation into the apparent attempt to hijack and possibly crash a flydubai flight to Israel a day earlier.
The state news agency WAM said that "the investigation team has launched its work into the incident already" and that the probe would seek to determine "the degree to which [the incident] was linked to any terrorist activity or intent."
The case will also seek to establish whether it was a pre-meditated and planned incident involving other actors or the work of a lone perpetrator.
Israeli Defense Minister Israel Katz had called the emergency on the flight to Tel Aviv "an attempted jihadist terror attack" that was thwarted.
Passengers described rushing the cockpit to assist the pilot after he was stabbed by his copilot, who then put the plane into a steep dive in an apparent attempt to crash the airliner.
Aside from minor cuts and bruises among those who intervened in the cockpit, the passengers - the vast majority of whom were Israeli - were all unhurt.
Why does the UAE have jurisdiction in the case?
Judicial authorities in the UAE have jurisdiction over the incident.
This is because the aircraft is registered in the UAE and flies under its flag, the statement said, adding that UAE law applied to crimes committed on board "even if they occur outside the country's territory."
The plane was over northern Saudi Arabia for the majority of the early-morning security incident, with tracking data suggesting it briefly crossed into Jordan before turning around to make an emergency landing at the nearby Tabuk Airport in Saudi Arabia.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had also indicated the likelihood of the UAE leading any investigation in a TV interview with Fox News.
"The attacking pilot is ... now being investigated in Saudi Arabia. I think he'll be taken to the Emirates, where he comes from, or at least where he left, where he flew off from, and we'll be following and possibly also participating in this investigation," Netanyahu said.
The Omani copilot's identity has not been made public as yet and his motive is not clear. US President Donald Trump said that based on a discussion with Netanyahu, he understood that the suspect was "perhaps a terrorist or perhaps a whack-job."
Asked about the possibility of Iranian involvement amid the conflict in the Gulf, Netanyahu said "it's too early to say."
Israel's Herzog nominates 4 passengers for presidential medal
Israeli President Isaac Herzog plans to nominate four passengers who helped overpower the attacker for the Presidential Medal for Civil Courage.
Herzog and Netanyahu spoke with the passengers when they arrived at Ben Gurion Airport on a replacement flight late on Wednesday.
Herzog named the passengers as Yaniv Hayoun, Shota Musayev, Zvika Manes and Asaf Rajuan.
"You put yourselves at risk to save others and prevented a terrible disater," Herzog said. "Today, the whole world saw the beautiful and courageous face of Israeli society."
The medal is Israel's highest civilian award for heroism. Herzog confers the medal but typically nominees are formally chosen by a committee.
Musayev, a dentist who administered first aid to the severely wounded Indian pilot, told Herzog everyone on board had acted courageously.
"We supported one another on the plane and also when we arrived in Saudi Arabia, and we took care of each other as we should," he said.
The Indian captain, Smit Machchhar, has also received staunch praise from Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu and from India's Narendra Modi. Passengers described how the pilot fought off his attacker despite his wounds and was able to open the cockpit door to let them in to aid him. He was in a stable condition in a Saudi hospital, India's Embassy in Riyadh said on Wednesday.
"In the face of the gravest danger and despite being seriously injured, he showed immense courage and an unwavering resolve to protect the lives of others," Modi said online. "His valor helped save hundreds of lives and avert a great tragedy."
Edited by: Elizabeth Schumacher
If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google, so you'll always see our verified news first.