What you need to know
- Houthi rebels in Yemen say Friday's Saudi strikes on the port city of Hodeida hit civilian infrastructure, injuring two people
- Saudi Arabia says it will do everything necessary to protect its shipping amid a Houthi-enforced maritime blockade in the Red Sea
- A flare-up between Iran-backed Houthis and Saudi Arabia, and the consequent disruption of shipping in the Red Sea, could worsen the global economic fallout from the war
Here are the latest developments from the Iran war and the wider Middle East on Saturday, July 25:
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Iran says oil sales continued despite wartime disruptions
Iran's oil ministry says it sold $18 billion (nearly €16 billion) worth of oil during the conflict with the United States and Israel, as well as during the tenuous ceasefire.
"This covers more than 60% of the oil revenues forecast in the year's budget in the midst of the crisis," it added.
The ministry says $11.5 billion came during the war, with another $6.5 billion generated during the ceasefire period, which unraveled earlier this month.
The claim contradicts a statement by Iran's parliament speaker and chief negotiator, Mohammad Bagher Qalibaf, who said in late June that Iran was unable to export any oil during the US blockade of its ports.
Ukraine's Zelenskiy says Russian satellites helping Iran direct strikes
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy claimed that Russia was giving Iran satellite data to help direct attacks in the Middle East.
"Since the beginning of July, we have recorded active Russian satellite surveillance of the Gulf states and US military facilities located there," he wrote on X.
He said there was a "clear correlation between Russia's satellite imagery of these sites and Iranian strikes," citing attacks in Bahrain, Jordan and Kuwait.
Zelenskyy said he instructed his intelligence services to share the information with allies.
There was no immediate comment from Russia on Zelenskyy's remarks.
WATCH: US President Trump threatens 'massive attacks' on Iran
President Donald Trump says the US and Iran are talking but Tehran is not yet ready for a peace deal. But is the US prepared for the "major military punishment" that Trump has promised Iran?
Air defense system operated by Greek military downs missiles over Saudi Arabia - report
An air defense system operated by Greek military personnel in Saudi Arabia intercepted two ballistic missiles launched from Yemen on Saturday, news agency Reuters cited Greek security sources as saying.
The missiles were targeting oil refineries in Yanbu, Reuters added.
Reuters reported that the interception was the second time that Greek military personnel had operated the system.
Since 2021, an bilateral defense agreement to protect Saudi Arabia's critical energy infrastructure has seen Greece deploy a US-made Patriot air defense battery, operated by Hellenic Air Force personnel.
Earlier in the morning, the Saudi Civil Defense had alerted residents of Yanbu about a "potential danger" in the governorate, without giving any further details. It later advised the public that the said danger had passed.
A series of strikes and counter-strikes by Yemen's Houthi rebels and Saudi Arabia have opened a new front in a war that has gripped the Middle East following US-Israeli strikes on Iran in February.
Why Iran's Pickaxe Mountain is a tough target for the US
A mysterious underground complex near Iran's Natanz nuclear facility is drawing global attention after US President Donald Trump suggested it could become the target of a military strike, with Trump claiming there may be uranium centrifuges located at the site.
Tehran has released almost no information about the complex burrowed under what is known in Farsi as "Kuh-e Kolang Gaz La," or Pickaxe Mountain.
Although the site has surfaced repeatedly in reports over the past few years, its purpose remains unclear. That uncertainty has made it one of the most closely watched locations linked to Iran's nuclear activities.
.
WATCH: Is the US prepared for the 'major military punishment' that Trump has promised Iran?
President Donald Trump says the US and Iran are talking but Tehran is not yet ready for a peace deal. Trump says the US is 'locked and loaded' and has threatened to intensify attacks against Iran which it has launched daily since the ceasefire broke down two weeks ago.
Houthis claim missile attack in Saudi Arabia's south
Yemen's Houthi rebels have claimed a missile attack on the southern Saudi city of Jizan.
The Iran-backed group's Ansarollah media posted on Telegram early Saturday that fires had broken out in Jizan after a "Yemeni missile attack."
The militant group had earlier accused US-ally Riyadh of a "dangerous escalation"and warned that its actions "will not go unanswered."
A Saudi Civil defense alert said "danger has passed in Jazan Province," without mentioning a missile strike.
It issued another warning for "potential danger" in the Yanbu governorate.
Yemen's Houthis vow retaliation for Saudi strikes
The Iran-backed Houthi rebels in Yemen have accused Saudi Arabia of targeting civilian infrastructure, amid an escalating flare-up with Riyadh.
Saudi Arabia on Friday hit the Houthi-held port city of Hodeida with strikes, the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen said, in response to the rebel group attacking Saudi oil tankers in the Red Sea as part of a maritime blockade.
"The Saudi enemy's targeting of civilian facilities in Hodeida and Kamaran island constitutes a dangerous escalation," the Houthis' Ansarollah media posted on Telegram.
"We affirm that these recent crimes will not go unanswered."
Houthi-run Al Masirah television said on Saturday that Saudi strikes had targeted facilities belonging to the state telecommunications corporation and Kamaran island, off Yemen's western coast.
The broadcaster reported that one worker was wounded in Hodeida while a woman was also injured on Kamaran Island.
The Saudi-led coalition, meanwhile, claimed that it hit "Houthi military sites" and destroyed targets that were posing a threat to commercial vessels in the Red Sea.
Riyadh said it would do everything necessary to protect its ships, warning the Houthis that if they continued "hostile acts then there will be no hesitation in responding."
For Saudi Arabia, a top oil producer, the Red Sea had emerged a critical shipping alternative to the war-blockaded Strait of Hormuz.
Welcome to our coverage
After the Strait of Hormuz, the conflict has now embroiled another one of the world's vital energy shipping corridors - the Red Sea.
Earlier this week, Yemen's Iran-backed Houthi rebels announced a blockade of Saudi vessels in the Red Sea, and then claimed strikes on two Saudi oil tankers for violating it.
The Saudi-led coalition in Yemen responded on Friday by attacking the Houthi-held Yemeni port city of Hodeida. The coalition said it had only targeted "military" sites linked to threats against commercial shipping in the Red Sea.
But the Houthis accused the coalition of targeting civilian infrastructure and have now said they would retaliate against Saudi Arabia.
Before we dive in further on the deepening crisis in the Middle East, here is a round-up of developments in the region on Friday:
- The US launched strikes on Iran for the 13th consecutive night. Iranian state media reported explosions across the country
- US President Donald Trump said Iran will pay the financial cost of any damage to ships or cargo amid the dispute over the Strait of Hormuz
- Trump also claimed that Tehran is getting "very serious" in its discussions with the US
- On the other hand, Iran's Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi said Tehran would hold any country assisting the US in an attack on the Islamic republic, accountable
- The Houthi rebel group in Yemen denied that it was completely closing the Bab al-Mandeb Strait, which links the Red Sea to the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean
Stay tuned as we bring you the latest on the US-Iran war and the Middle East.