Niger's Ministry of National Defense on Saturday said that a group of soldiers shot at "sensitive" locations in the capital Niamey in an apparent mutiny.
Gunfire and explosions had been heard across Niger's capital, Niamey, overnight into the early hours of Saturday morning.
Attackers had targeted Diori Hamani International Airport, which also houses a military air base, and attempted to breach the security perimeter around the presidency.
"Another cowardly attack on Base 101 and once again our defense and security forces ensured ... Situation under control," said lawmaker Bana Wagana Ibrahim, who serves on the Consultative Council.
Niger military 'gradually regaining control'
The military said it was "gradually regaining control" after mutineers took soldiers hostage at a base near the airport in Niamey, AFP news agency reported.
Authorities urged the public to "remain calm and freely go about their business" in a statement read out on public television and signed by Defense Minister General Salifou Mody.
The attack posed the latest threat to Niger's military junta, led by Abdourahamane Tchiani, who seized power in a 2023 coup.
Niger, like its Sahelian neighbors Mali and Burkina Faso, has for years been ruled by a military junta that has struggled to stem a jihadi insurgency.
National TV signal reportedly cut after gunfire
The shooting began around 1 a.m. local time (0000 GMT) and continued until daybreak.
Locals said that the country's national television had gone off air.
Tele Sahel's satellite and online programming was replaced with a black screen at 9 a.m. local time (0800 GMT), AFP reported. It was restored around one hour later.
Niamey has been targeted by jihadists twice this year: once by the so-called "Islamic State in the Sahel" group (EIS) and again in June by their rivals from the Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims (JNIM).
Edited by: Sean Sinico, Dmytro Hubenko and Wesley Dockery
If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google by clicking here and hitting the "star" or "preferred" button, so you'll always see our verified news first.