The right-wing government of Giorgia Meloni on Friday became the longest-serving since the Italian Republic was established 80 years ago.
Meloni's government, the most-right wing to have ruled Italy since World War II, has been in charge for 1,413 days.
That's one day more than billionaire media tycoon Silvio Berlusconi, who still holds the record for collectively serving longest as prime minister with nine years in office, albeit under different governments.
Since Italy became a republic after the end of the war, it has had 68 governments within 80 years, with governments lasting around 13 months on average.
How is Meloni celebrating her record tenure?
Meloni and her far-right Brothers of Italy (Fdl) party are planning a celebration on Friday in the port city of Bari in the southern Puglia region.
Some 80 coaches will transport supporters there, with Meloni due to address the gathering in the evening.
Deputy Prime Ministers Matteo Salvini and Antonio Tajani are also due to appear via video link. The event is effectively an opportunity to campaign for Italy's 2027 election.
What does the Meloni government and its supporters say?
The Meloni government boasts one million extra people in employment in its four years in power, unemployment below 6% as well as a €21 billion ($24 billion) reduction in personal income taxes.
They are also especially proud of what they say is a sharp decline in migrant arrivals.
The prime minister, whose party has neo-Fascist roots, also says Italy's influence on the world stage has grown.
Meloni's nationalist streak was celebrated at home on more than one occasion. One notable example was when US President Donald Trump, with whom the Italian leader had initially and unusually enjoyed a cordial relationship, said she had begged him for a photo.
"Italy doesn't beg," Meloni said of Trump's claim, much to the satisfaction of many Italians.
What do Meloni's critics say?
Critics of Italy's first female prime minister and her longest-serving government however argue that despite the numbers, the country's persistent problems remain.
They list weak productivity, demographic decline and long-standing inefficiencies in healthcare, education and public administration. The rising cost of living is also a major criticism.
"Have wages increased? No. Petrol costs more, job insecurity has increased, people are retiring less and the healthcare system is functioning less effectively," Maurizio Landini, head of the CGIL trade union, said ahead of the celebrations.
Parallel to the Meloni party in Bari, her opponents are also planning a gathering across the city. Organizers accuse her government of creating a "war and weapons economy" and a "police state," as well as fueling a climate of hate against migrants.
Meanwhile, others think the prime minister strayed from her election campaign and has become too moderate, including a potential challenger in the coming vote.
Retired army general Roberto Vannacci, whose party is further to the far right than Meloni's, is known for hard-line positions on immigration and national identity.
Polls show his party has overtaken both the anti-immigrant League and right-wing Forza Italia parties, both members of Meloni's ruling coalition.
Edited by: Natalie Muller
If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google by clicking here and hitting the "star" or "preferred" button, so you'll always see our verified news first.