What you need to know
This blog has closed. Thank you for reading.
Here were some of the top headlines from and about Germany on Thursday, July 23, 2026:
- German Foreign Minister Johann Wadephul finished his Africa trip in South Africa
- Wadephul criticized Trump's announcement to exclude South Africa from this year's G20 summit in Miami
- Chess is booming in Germany, as players gathered for the German Chess Summit in Dresden
- Germany's expanded Afghan deportation policy criticized by Amnesty
- Man dies of his injuries after an attack at a bank in Regensburg
Tired of missing our real-time updates? Click here to add us as a Preferred Source on Google. Then tap the "Star" or "Preferred" to keep DW News at the top of your feed.
Indian expats in Berlin: Proud to be a 'cockroach'
What began with anger over a medical school entrance exam is now becoming a global protest movement. Young Indians abroad are challenging the Modi government on an international stage. DW spoke to Indian expats protesting in Berlin.
Government plans €16 million boost for research into Jewish life in Germany
Research Minister Dorothee Bär has announced a new fund for research into Jewish contemporary life in Germany.
Bär said the federal government would look to free up €16 million (about $18 million) over the next four years to fund such research.
Speaking to the Jüdische Allgemeine newspaper, Bär said contemporary Jewish research was not well developed in Germany's academic landscape.
She said the funding would cover all aspects of Jewish life "as they currently manifest in culture, language and religious customs," and said the aim was to make the Jewish presence more visible in society.
"This would be a contribution to showing how positive and enriching Jewish life is for us all," Bär said.
The current government called in its coalition agreement for establishing a "competence network" for Jewish contemporary studies and to strengthen research on antisemitism.
An antisemitism research network already exists. Bär said that since antisemitism was unfortunately part of everyday life for many Jewish people, some overlap would be unavoidable.
"We, therefore, want both networks to work together, exchange ideas and learn from each other," she said.
Amnesty criticizes Germany's expanded Afghan deportation policy
Amnesty International has criticized Germany's expansion of who can be eligible to be deported back to Afghanistan, no longer limiting the practice to people convicted of crimes or deemed security threats.
This comes after the state of Hesse's Interior Ministry shared information from Federal Police, saying the previous restrictions had been lifted. A spokeswoman at the Federal Interior Ministry obliquely confirmed that the information was accurate, saying that the focus of deportations to Afghanistan was primarily on convicted criminals "but not limited to them."
So far, all 173 men deported to Afghanistan during the current legislative period had come to law enforcement's attention either as a convicted criminal or a perceived threat, the ministry says.
But Amnesty cited six cases of pending returns where it said the people had no criminal record. It highlighted the case of 46-year-old Faridoon Tofan, in particular.
"Whoever sends people like Faridoon Tofan back to Afghanistan, is sending them with eyes wide open into the hands of those who pose a concrete threat to them," Amnesty's asylum law expert Nina Alizadeh Marandi said. "This deportation could mean detention, torture or even mortal danger for him."
Marandi said that threats against Tofan's family in Kabul had intensified since he was taken to see a Taliban representative a few weeks ago: "His wife and six children live in constant fear, his sons no longer go to school," she said.
Amnesty called the case a "dangerous precedent that must urgently be prevented."
Chancellor Merz's Christian Democrats had pledged a tougher line on migration and particularly the returns of asylum-seekers found to have committed crimes or to be a terrorist threat during last year's federal elections. Germany has also been taking some small steps to establish working relations with the Taliban, despite not recognizing it as a legitimate government, almost five years after they reclaimed de facto power.
UPDATE - Man dies of injuries after attack at Regensburg bank: police
Police say one person has died after sustaining severe injuries at a bank branch in Regensburg (see entry below). Special units were dispatched and apprehended a 20-year-old German man who was reportedly armed with a knife.
WATCH - Water restrictions across Germany
Germanydrought and recurring heatwaves put pressure on water supplies. Around 80 municipalities have imposed limits on activities such as filling pools, watering gardens and washing cars.
Researchers say climate change is disrupting the country's water cycle, with dry periods, extreme heat and intense rainfall reducing groundwater replenishment. A new national monitoring platform aims to identify shortages earlier, while experts call for better water storage, greener cities and long-term adaptation as water scarcity becomes a growing challenge.
Possible bank hostage situation in Regensburg, Bavaria, 1 severely wounded
Police in Bavaria say one person has sustained severe injuries as a man thought to be armed with a knife is holed up in a bank branch in Regensburg.
Special police units are headed to the scene. Police do not as yet have access to the building and assume other people are likely inside.
Germany says Middle East situation 'moving in the wrong direction'
Defense Minister Boris Pistorius said the German government is "very worried" that attacks on oil tankers in the Red Sea by Yemen's Houthi militants could escalate the current conflict in the region.
Pistorius addressed the situation in the Middle East while on a visit to a facility belonging to armaments firm Hensoldt.
It all comes after the Iran-backed Houthi militant group in Yemen declared a blockade of Saudi ports earlier this week.
The German defense minister said things in the Middle East are "clearly moving in the wrong direction."
"At present, nothing - absolutely nothing - suggests that a ceasefire, let alone peace, could be reached" in the region, Pistorius said.
He added that the situation has "dire consequences" for all countries relying on energy supplies from the region.
WATCH - Germany bans alcohol at train stations
Germany is rolling out a nationwide alcohol ban at train stations. But if you can still drink on trains and in station bars, does the ban actually make sense?
Top German court strikes down lawsuit against speed of legislative process
Germany's Federal Constitutional Court on Wednesday struck down a lawsuit that had argued that lawmakers had acted too quickly in passing the 2023 heating law.
A former lawmaker from the conservative CDU party, Thomas Heilmann, had made the case that the speed at which Germany's previous three-party coalition had acted in passing the bill had violated his rights as a parliamentarian.
"When does a 'fast' legislative process become 'too fast'?" Presiding Judge Ann-Katrin Kaufhold summarized the case.
The reform of the heating law - officially the Building Energy Act - aimed to make heating in Germany more climate-friendly through the gradual replacement of oil and gas heating systems. It drew heavy criticism from opposition parties at the time.
Heilmann argued that members of parliament - as in the case of the heating law - were sometimes presented with extensive amendments, sometimes hundreds of pages long, just days or hours before final deliberation, leaving insufficient time for consultation.
On Wednesday, the court dismissed Heilmann's lawsuit as inadmissible.
"The Constitution sets a limit on the acceleration of legislative procedures, but not in the sense of a specific time limit," said Judge Kaufhold in Karlsruhe.
Heilmann had not demonstrated that the parliamentarians' rights to participate had been rendered meaningless by the speed or that deliberation had been forgone, the court said.
South Africa should not be excluded from G20 Summit - Wadephul
Foreign Minister Johann Wadephul, while visiting South Africa as part of his Africa tour, criticized US President Donald Trump's decision not to invite South Africa to the G20 Summit in Florida later this year.
"Excluding South Africa means sidelining an important African voice as well as a regional economic and political leader," Wadephul said during a visit to the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg.
This was in no one's interest, he added, "because, especially in times of growing global economic uncertainty, we need more cooperation, not less."
South Africa is a founding member of the G20, which gathers major global economies and serves as a key forum for multilateral engagement.
South Africa also hosted last year's G20 summit in Johannesburg, which the Trump administration boycotted after claims that South Africa was committing a genocide against the country's white farmers. South Africa has categorically denied the Trump administration's allegations.
Amid the rift, Trump announced that South Africa was disinvited to the G20 summit in December 2026, arguing "the country has demonstrated to the world they are not a country worthy of membership anywhere."
Single parents in Germany more than twice as likely to be at risk of poverty - report
In 2025, 28.9% of people in single-parent households were at risk of poverty, according to numbers released by Germany's Federal Statistic office.
That's more than double the share of couples in households with children, a rate which stood at 12%.
In Germany, a family or individual is considered at risk of poverty if their net income is less than 60% of the median income.
Overall, one in five families with children under 18 is headed by a single parent. However, the number of single parents has fallen slightly over the past decade, from 1.65 million in 2015 to 1.62 million in 2025.
The report also highlights changes in the gender composition of single-parent households. The proportion of single mothers declined slightly from 2015, from 88.9% to 84.4%, while the share of single fathers increased - though mothers still make up the vast majority of single parents.
Lastly, the figures show that single mothers are more likely to work full-time than mothers in couple households, with 38.6% employed full-time compared with 30.7% of mothers living with a partner.
For fathers, the opposite trend applies: 83.8% of single fathers worked full-time, compared with 91.5% of fathers in couple households.
Is chess booming in Germany?
Chess players from around Germany gathered in Dresden this week for the annual Chess Summit, as the sport is enjoying unprecedented popularity in Germany.
"Our membership numbers are growing at an excellent rate. We are on the verge of surpassing the 100,000 mark," Paul Meyer-Dunker, President of Germany's National Chess Association, told the dpa news agency in Dresden.
Many of the 2300 clubs across Germany are feeling the surge. According to Meyer-Dunker, some clubs in cities such as Berlin are no longer accepting new members because of the overwhelming demand.
Despite the strong growth, Meyer-Dunker said there is still room for improvement when it comes to female participation. Around 90% of members of the German Chess Federation are male.
The highest proportion of girls is found among the youngest age group - children under eight years old - where they account for roughly one-third of participants. However, those figures drop sharply among older age groups.
Nonetheless, Meyer-Dunker believes Germany's national teams are stronger than they have been for a long time.
"We have a national team in which every player is ranked in the world's top 100. This is a team that has a chance to compete for a medal at the Chess Olympiad in Uzbekistan this September," he said.
He pointed to Vincent Keymer, as well as Matthias Blübaum, a two-time European champion, as players who belong among the world's elite.
On the women's side as well, Germany has top-level players such as Elisabeth Pähtz and Dinara Wagner. In the European Team Championships in 2025, the German women's team won a medal - bronze - for the first time.
FM Wadephul off to South Africa, in final leg of Africa visit
German Foreign Minister Johann Wadephul's Africa trip is reaching its grand conclusion in Johannesburg, South Africa today.
South Africa is not only the largest economy in sub-Saharan Africa's largest economy, but by far Germany's most important economic partner on the continent.
More than 600 German companies operate in the country, with the trade volume between the two countries reaching €20 billion ($22,9 billion) in 2025.
In Johannesburg, Wadephul is set to meet President Cyril Ramaphosa and Foreign Minister Ronald Lamola.
Wadephul is also scheduled to visit the plant of Siemens Energy South Africa, which produces turbines and generators for power plants and equips solar and wind farms.
German direct investment in South Africa reached €7.99 billion ($9.1 billion) in 2023, while South African investment in Germany has reached €2.6 billion, according to data from Germany's Federal Foreign Office.
Welcome to our coverage
Germany is hurtling towards its annual Sommerloch - literally the "summer hole" that time of year when parliament is in recess and many citizens are off enjoying vacation. But that doesn't mean the news stops.
Germany's Foreign Minister Johann Wadephul is wrapping up his four-day Africa tour in South Africa, after previous stops in Nigeria and Mauritania. Talks with South African political leaders are expected to focus on economic partnerships.
Meanwhile, in more off-beat news, chess is experiencing a surge in Germany. Players - from elite levels to amateur - are currently gathered in Dresden for the annual Chess Summit.
Stay tuned for more news and analysis!