Four Democratic Tennessee state lawmakers sent a letter to the Department of Children's Services demanding answers about safety and oversight in the state's juvenile justice facilities.
The letter cites a recent WPLN and ProPublica investigation that found that juvenile justice facilities run by Tennessee businessman Jason Crews repeatedly failed to report abuse of children and other serious incidents to the state as required. The reporting involved interviews with dozens of former staff and youth, along with a review of emergency call logs, company records and state documents. Crews and his company Wayne Halfway House run all three of the state's highest-security youth prisons.
"The allegations that serious physical and sexual abuse, dangerous restraints, injuries, and other critical incidents have gone unreported by WHH demand an urgent, transparent, and independently verifiable response from the Department of Children's Services," lawmakers wrote.
After WPLN and ProPublica sent a copy of the letter to the company, a spokesperson said that Wayne Halfway House "continues to meet or exceed performance standards set by Tennessee," citing state audits. The spokesperson also said that Wayne Halfway House has helped more than 200 youth earn a high school diploma or equivalent in the last three years.
In emailed statements to WPLN and ProPublica about the previous reporting, the company said it follows state policy and law and "vehemently denies" that Crews or his company ever discouraged staff from reporting serious or life-threatening incidents to the state. It described former employees who spoke with us as "untrustworthy sources" with a "clear bias" against the company and called their allegations "substantially flawed."
Lawmakers are asking for answers to several questions raised by this investigation, including what steps the department is taking to address the allegations, how much money the state spends to place youth in Wayne Halfway House facilities, and who is being considered to operate new juvenile facilities the department is building.
"We also request an opportunity to meet with Department leadership to discuss these issues, review the Department's response, and identify the legislative and administrative actions necessary to ensure that no child's safety depends on abuse first becoming a news story," lawmakers wrote.
In response to the news organizations' initial investigation, DCS said it is looking into incidents that were uncovered by the reporting. DCS did not respond to a request for comment on the letter.
Lawmakers noted that the latest investigation joins a "long and deeply troubling record of reports" on juvenile justice facilities across the state. They referenced previous reporting from WPLN and ProPublica that found a county-run East Tennessee juvenile detention center was locking kids in solitary confinement in violation of state law. The department said it would take steps to address the findings from the 2023 investigation, and the superintendent of the facility, Richard Bean, later stepped down.
State Sen. Heidi Campbell, who signed onto the letter, also pushed for independent oversight of juvenile justice facilities in 2024, after WPLN and ProPublica's reporting from East Tennessee. Campbell and others working on that bill said a lobbyist for Wayne Halfway House asked them to exempt privately run facilities from oversight. The oversight bill eventually failed. A lobbyist for Wayne Halfway House told the news organizations at the time that the company was concerned about giving regulatory power to an outside agency "without more extensive consideration."
Lawmakers are also worried about the state's increased spending on juvenile justice, especially as Tennessee plans to spend more than $400 million to build more facilities. The cost to hold 31 youth at a Wayne Halfway House facility for a year is roughly the same amount it would take the state to expand grocery benefits for 700,000 school-aged children during the summer, lawmakers wrote.
"Given the amount of money Tennessee is currently spending, and plans to invest, in juvenile justice and residential facilities, we have serious concerns about repeated findings and allegations of lack of oversight, transparency, and accountability in these facilities," lawmakers wrote.