A little-known effort to bring an artificial intelligence tool into Texas public schools began about a year ago, with the help of the state's top education official, Mike Morath.
In September 2025, Morath responded to an email from associates of a private school chain called Alpha School who wanted to talk about using their AI program to educate kids in Texas classrooms.
"I'd love to schedule a follow-up discussion," Morath replied.
The online platform wasn't new to Morath, the state's education commissioner. Just three months earlier, he had supported Alpha leaders' bid to open a charter school in Texas that would use the same technology. Then the Texas State Board of Education, which has the final say on such charter decisions, voted it down 10 to 3. Board members cited concerns about the company's use of AI to teach and students' screen time, as well as lingering questions about the drastic student test improvements Alpha leaders presented.
But Morath and his agency leaders did not need the board's approval to help get Alpha's AI model into public schools.
Over the last year, Morath and his staff at the Texas Education Agency exchanged a flurry of emails with leaders of companies connected to Alpha about possible partnerships, visited their campuses several times, helped with a one-page explainer about the program to share with school districts and connected them with district leaders, according to communications obtained by ProPublica and The Texas Tribune through public information requests.
One email revealed that Morath offered to personally introduce an Alpha leader to the superintendent he appointed to lead the yearslong state takeover of Houston Independent School District, the largest in the state.
"I'd also like to set up another site visit to visit both your Austin secondary and primary with my team," wrote Morath. "The Superintendent of H.I.S.D. would also like to do a site visit, so l'll connect y'all separately. And hopefully we can schedule them to happen on the same day."
The emails show that state education officials and Alpha affiliates approached at least 10 school districts about the AI program. After the coordination, at least three of those districts - Houston; Fort Davis, in West Texas; and Aldine, near Houston - launched pilot programs incorporating the AI tool.
The full extent of Morath and his agency's involvement, as well as the number of public school districts using the AI program, remains unclear. The TEA has not responded to questions about its efforts for months, initially failed to provide some of Morath's emails in response to public information requests and continues fighting the release of additional communications.
The TEA sent a written statement that said "there is no formal partnership between TEA and Alpha Schools." But the agency continued that it "is always interested in promising ways to improve student outcomes in math and reading." The statement said TEA officials connected district leaders who were interested in Alpha's program but left the decision up to them on whether to use it.
Aldine and Fort Davis leaders told the newsrooms it was not unusual for the state agency to recommend potential partnerships and expressed excitement about the pilot. All three districts with pilot programs said they will use the AI software for supplemental learning rather than fully implementing the Alpha School model of using it to teach all students basic subjects in two hours a day while the human teachers, which Alpha calls guides, focus on motivation and emotional support.
Some education experts and State Board of Education members who voted against Alpha leaders' attempt to open a charter school last year raised concerns with the state's efforts to use the AI-led platform given its recent track record.
ProPublica and the Tribune recently reported that Texas was among at least nine states that rejected Alpha leaders' applications to open publicly funded charter schools that would use its AI-driven learning tool, according to an Instagram post from the company's co-founder.
The newsrooms also found that students performed significantly worse on state-mandated exams than Alpha leaders predicted at the one charter school they got approved, in Arizona, and at an existing school in Texas where students used the AI program last year.
Morath's agency knew about results in at least one of those charters, Texas Preparatory School in Austin. Last year, state test scores compiled by his agency showed just 21% of students passed. The TEA then gave the charter its third consecutive F rating, mostly based on those scores.
David DeMatthews, an education professor at the University of Texas at Austin, said it was "disheartening" and "painful" to learn that the TEA was promoting the product when the company has not yet publicly shown its success in public or charter schools, where there are likely to be more students who have learning barriers or struggle academically.
"That raises questions about whether TEA is serving its public interest and is being transparent and accountable to us," DeMatthews said. "It'd be one thing if they were approved as a charter and they did have a track record and they could show evidence. We don't have any of those sorts of things."
The platform's expansion into traditional public schools comes as government officials across the country, including in Texas, have taken an increasingly skeptical view of AI use in schools. New York City Mayor Zohran Mamdani recently banned generative AI for elementary and middle school students in the nation's largest school district. Leaders in Los Angeles implemented a similar restriction. In August, Texas Gov. Greg Abbott proposed further limiting screen time in public schools.
Abbott, who has received over $1.5 million in political donations from Alpha co-founder MacKenzie Price, did not agree to an interview or directly answer whether he supports the AI platform in Texas schools.
"A great teacher in the classroom is the most important element of a quality education," Andrew Mahaleris, Abbott's press secretary, wrote in a statement to the newsrooms. "Any tool a district deploys must keep teachers at the center of the classroom, limit unnecessary screen time, and prove results for students."
Abbott's Democratic opponent in the November governor's race, Gina Hinojosa, recently had a press conference opposing the use of Alpha's AI program in Houston ISD. That came after she'd already made a campaign promise to fire Morath if she is elected.
Alpha leaders did not agree to interviews or answer detailed questions for this story. Price has repeatedly told her social media followers that she wants to bring the AI model into public schools to make it accessible for all families. School leaders previously defended the model in interviews and directly in response to Texas Education Board members' concerns about the proposed charter. They maintained that teachers' roles remain significant despite lessons delivered by the AI platform and that screen time at the school would comply with national recommendations, and they referred to a self-published paper summarizing that Alpha students learn twice as fast as their peers while earning test scores among the top echelon nationwide.
Pam Little, a Republican serving as vice chair of the elected State Board of Education, said she hopes Abbott's proposal to limit screen time in public schools leads to the removal of screens in classrooms altogether. That includes eliminating pilot programs like those using Alpha's AI platform.
"I don't want anything AI in our schools, especially at the lower grades," said Little, who last year voted against the proposed charter, which would use Alpha's AI platform.
Gustavo Reveles, a Democratic Education Board member who voted against Alpha leaders' charter application last summer, said he's worried the TEA is ignoring the board's apprehension by helping to bring Alpha's AI tool into public schools.
"It certainly raises a red flag that perhaps there's ways to circumvent that concern," Reveles said.
Pilot Program Planning
Last fall, local television news cameras captured Morath alongside U.S. Secretary of Education Linda McMahon as the pair visited an Alpha campus in Austin. Joining them was Price, the school's co-founder. Morath said that day, "Our goal is to make sure that children have access to great schools," regardless of who runs them.
He added, "There are lessons to be learned in a school like Alpha."
That week, Morath emailed Price and her husband, Andy Price, who business filings show holds various roles at Alpha's related companies, including chief financial officer.
Morath also connected with an employee from Studient, a company that uses Alpha's AI technology, now often called TimeBack. Studient, which uses the tool for students struggling academically, is among the web of corporate entities connected to Alpha, according to its privacy policy and business filings with the Texas secretary of state.
In his emails, Morath said he would like to learn more about Studient's intervention work with kids lagging academically. He also wanted to discuss 1882 partnerships, formal arrangements in which a public school contracts with an existing charter, university, nonprofit or state-approved entity to run the campus. Districts with consecutive failing ratings will sometimes use these partnerships to avoid possible state takeovers.
Morath's staff set up a follow-up discussion with the Prices for October.
Emails show the commissioner visited Alpha's campuses again with six other TEA leaders. His staff coordinated to go on the same day as Houston Superintendent Mike Miles. Not only had Morath chosen Miles to lead the Houston district in 2023, but the two had worked together at Dallas ISD when Morath was a school board member and Miles was the superintendent.
As of August, the TEA said it could not find any documentation of Alpha or its other companies applying for or running an 1882 partnership. But after the school visit, emails show, other state Education Agency leaders began communicating with Alpha and Studient associates about more informal pilot programs.
Andrew Hodge, associate commissioner of system innovation at the TEA, followed up last November to figure out how the state could test out Alpha's AI model. Hodge emailed Joe Liemandt, the tech billionaire behind the software company Trilogy, who pioneered and invested $1 billion into Alpha's AI-learning technology.
"It was great meeting you and learning about Alpha last Monday," wrote Hodge on Nov. 5. "I'd like to schedule a follow up discussion with you/your team to talk through possibilities for piloting a few supplemental (you called this Tier 3 in your outline) instances in the state. What's the best way to get 30-45 minutes to discuss?"
Hodge eventually had another member of his team, Michael Strange, tour Alpha's private school in Fort Worth. Strange oversees the TEA's blended learning programs.
"I'd like for him to be able to visit your school as we continue to improve our supports for TX districts and better understand the landscape of tech-enabled models in K-12," emailed Hodge.
By April, emails show, Strange was regularly in contact with Andy Price and a Studient employee about helping to launch pilot programs in public schools. At one point, Strange sent them a to-do list with next steps, which included him drafting a one-page explainer of the pilot program to share with districts.
Andy Price, MacKenzie Price, Studient, Hodge, Liemandt and Strange did not respond to the newsrooms' requests for comment.
In all, ProPublica and the Tribune identified at least five school districts - Ector County, Fort Bend, Irving, Pecos and Pflugerville - that confirmed they were approached about partnering with Alpha but did not pursue an agreement. Only Ector County provided a reason, stating the district "determined our school day is not currently structured to effectively implement or support the pilot."
But Alpha and Studient officials had some successes. By mid-June, Strange applauded their progress securing pilots with Fort Davis and Aldine.
"Happy Friday!" wrote Strange ahead of a check-in. "Looking forward to seeing everyone today and excited to hear that districts are moving forward."
Leaders at Fort Davis and Aldine told ProPublica and the Tribune they are using the AI platform this year to help students who are behind academically. Michelle Hartmann, deputy superintendent at Fort Davis, which enrolls around 800 students, said it will deploy the model in its K-8 classrooms for students who need additional help in reading and math.
"We're excited because we see it as an opportunity to provide an extra layer of intervention," Hartmann said. She later followed up with the newsrooms to say the district could not be happier after the first weeks of the pilot and that students are very engaged.
Aldine will deploy the online platform to roughly 300 students across four middle school campuses that require support in math. Ashley Brown, an Aldine spokesperson, said the Alpha intervention model aligned with the district's mission "to provide a rigorous and enriching educational experience that prepares every student for success in college, career, and life."
Houston ISD plans to use the Alpha technology for students with strong test scores "to evaluate whether this instructional approach can accelerate academic growth," according to its press office.
The office said Houston ISD wasn't paying Alpha for the pilot but did not provide more details. The district asked the Texas attorney general to withhold the contract from the newsrooms under the state's public records act.