On May 24, Donald Trump Jr. was celebrating in the Bahamas, as scantily clad dancers in stilettos and sailor caps performed for him and his guests. It was the last night of his wedding, a lavish, three-day party held across a pair of ultra-exclusive private islands. A five-tier funfetti cake had been airlifted in from Florida, and helicopters and seaplanes descended on the islands before guests settled into their oceanfront villas. That night on the beach, Trump Jr. lifted his bride into the air while fireworks launched from a barge over the sea.
"It was everything we dreamed of and more," his wife later wrote on Instagram.
That dream was heavily funded by a secret benefactor: Umar Kremlev, a Russian oligarch close to President Vladimir Putin.
Kremlev footed the bill for hundreds of thousands of dollars of wedding expenses, according to records reviewed by ProPublica and interviews with three people familiar with the event. The oligarch paid to rent out one of the private islands, where a reception was held and where guests slept. He also covered other big-ticket items, like the fireworks show, and his team helped plan the event. Kremlev is the head of the International Boxing Association, a scandal-plagued sports group that has been financed by the Russian state-owned energy giant Gazprom. The wedding payments came from an IBA-affiliated entity in Dubai that the boxing association uses for financial transactions.
The guest list numbered around 50. It included Trump Jr.'s brother-in-law Jared Kushner, Eric Trump - and Kremlev, an imposing man with a shaved head who speaks limited English. The oligarch was part of a large group whose presence puzzled other attendees. They sometimes stood off by themselves, speaking Russian.
"It was really small, like, just really close friends," Trump Jr. later said on his podcast. "Tried to keep it really tight. And it was just awesome."
Kremlev's previously unreported relationship with Trump Jr. represents an extraordinary development: a member of Putin's circle financially supporting the president's son and gaining intimate access to the Trump family. For a decade, Putin's government, regarded as a chief adversary of the U.S., has been accused of efforts to influence American elections. Attempts by Russia to make inroads with the Trumps before the 2016 election exploded into controversy that dogged much of the president's first term.
Do You Have Information We Should Know About Donald Trump Jr.?
We're still reporting. If you know anything about Trump Jr., his businesses or his relationship with Umar Kremlev, please get in touch.
Justin Elliott
I'm always looking for under-covered stories about business and politics, no matter the specific subject. Contact me with tips, by email or securely on Signal. I take confidentiality seriously.
National security experts expressed alarm at Trump Jr. accepting the oligarch's largesse, saying it raised an urgent question: What motivated Kremlev to spend a fortune cultivating the connection?
"If I'm paying for your wedding, at some point, you're going to owe me something," said Frank Montoya Jr., a retired career FBI official who held senior counterintelligence roles. Oligarchs like Kremlev often act in coordination with the Russian government. While it's unclear if that happened here, Trump Jr. put himself in a precarious position, Montoya said. "This should be unthinkable for the son of the president. End of story."
Holden Triplett, who served as Trump's counterintelligence director on the National Security Council during his first term, said Russian intelligence frequently seeks to build ties with U.S. government officials and their family members. "Money is a tried-and-true method to gain access," said Triplett, who also worked for the FBI in Moscow.
In the days leading up to Trump Jr.'s wedding, Kremlev was in China as part of the delegation accompanying Putin, according to Chinese state media. The month before, Putin had bestowed him with a state honor, the Order of Friendship. The Ukrainian government has imposed sanctions on Kremlev personally, citing his closeness to Putin and Russian security services.
It's not clear why Kremlev helped pay for Trump Jr.'s wedding. The men appear to have met only recently. Public reporting suggests Trump Jr. could have afforded it himself, with Forbes recently estimating his net worth at roughly $300 million.
In response to detailed questions, a spokesperson for Trump Jr. did not dispute the wedding payments from Kremlev. "Umar is a personal friend of Don," he said. The spokesman said that Kremlev is "not someone he has a business relationship with" and that the men met through a mutual friend in the hunting world and bonded over their love of boxing and the outdoors.
A spokesperson for Trump Jr.'s brother Eric said of Kremlev: "Eric has absolutely no clue who this person is, nor has never heard his name."
In a statement, Kremlev's press office said, "Mr. Kremlev and Mr. Trump Jr have a friendly relationship" and they first met "a couple of years ago."
The press office described Kremlev as a businessman and philanthropist, adding, "Mr. Kremlev has never discussed political matters with any of his American friends and acquaintances," including Trump Jr. They said the boxing organization itself did not incur expenses for the wedding but did not comment on the payments from the Dubai entity. The press office also said that when Putin and Kremlev were in China recently, Kremlev was not part of Putin's "official delegation."
Kushner, who has been helping lead the U.S. government's negotiations with Russia over Ukraine, did not respond to requests for comment. The White House and the Russian government did not respond either.
The revelations come as Trump Jr. has emerged as a political power center in his own right. Beloved by the MAGA base, he reportedly played an active role in vetting White House cabinet picks for Trump's second term and was dubbed his father's "most essential political adviser" by The Wall Street Journal. "I certainly don't think I'd be sitting here as the VP nominee without Don's help," Vice President JD Vance told the outlet in late 2024.
This account is based on records and interviews with dozens of current and former IBA officials and contractors, wedding attendees and other people in Trump Jr.'s and Kremlev's circles.
Trump Jr. exchanged vows with socialite Bettina Anderson on a private island that was featured in "Pirates of the Caribbean" and the 2006 James Bond movie "Casino Royale." They had their first dance on a second private island nearby that can rent for around $100,000 a night, paid for by Kremlev. The company that put on the fireworks display charges around $70,000 for such shows. (Kremlev did not attend the ceremony itself, which was held on the first day and had just 18 guests, Trump Jr.'s spokesperson said.)
The atmosphere was Monte Carlo meets frat party - helicopters in and out, a beachside DJ set, beer pong tournaments. One day, the men went spearfishing. Artisans at the London fashion house Safiyaa spent 150 hours embroidering Anderson's bespoke silk reception outfit. The president's son had undergone treatment to better define his jawline for the occasion.
Some longtime friends of Trump Jr. told associates they were disappointed not to be invited, though a few of his closest business partners - executives at the Trump family crypto company, World Liberty Financial, and the venture capital firm 1789 Capital - did make the cut. President Trump himself skipped it. ("He'd like me to go, but it's going to be just a small, little private affair," the president told reporters beforehand. "I said, you know, this is not good timing for me.") But many of the guests were immediate family of the bride and groom.
That made the large contingent of Russians all the more conspicuous. "What are they doing here?" one person recalled thinking. At least one of the Russian guests had been with Kremlev on his China trip: Alexander Lagutin, a businessperson who has served in senior roles at a Russian defense contractor and a state-backed energy company. Kremlev's right hand at the IBA, Elena Sobol, attended the wedding too.
Since the wedding, the Trumps have released scores of photos and videos of the festivities. While they show many of the guests, the Russians have been absent from all of them. (The top of Kremlev's head is visible in the back of one group photo posted on Instagram by a friend of the bride.) After the party was over, on his "Triggered" podcast, Trump Jr. emphasized the event's privacy: "The people that were there - if you're on that list, you weren't talking."
In 2009, Umar Kremlev did not yet exist.
He was in his late 20s, with a criminal record for extortion and battery, still going by his birth name, Umar Lutfulloyev, according to the Russian independent news outlet Proekt. But he was about to rapidly ascend in Russia to a position of wealth and influence, with the help of a powerful friend. ("Mr. Kremlev has a completely clean legal record," his press office said.)
In 2010, he changed his name to Kremlev. He soon joined a Russian government-backed biker gang called the Night Wolves, eventually taking a leadership role, according to news reports. That is what first brought him close to Alexei Rubezhnoi, who now leads Putin's presidential security service, Proekt reported. In 2017, Kremlev took over the Russian Boxing Federation, after Rubezhnoi personally intervened to put him at the helm.
In 2020, Kremlev became president of the IBA. The association was something akin to FIFA but for boxing and had long overseen the sport in the Olympics. But it had been beset by corruption allegations and was on the brink of insolvency. Kremlev brought money to the table from Gazprom, the state-owned company that operates as an arm of Putin's government. Gazprom publicly became the IBA's financial backer, filling its coffers with tens of millions of dollars.
Former high-level IBA officials said that Kremlev had a clear political agenda. "Umar is guided by Putin. It was using the sport for soft political power," a former IBA board member told ProPublica. "It's geopolitics. That it's boxing is just happenstance." Kremlev, 43, is also heavily involved in an organization called Healthy Fatherland, run by his 23-year-old wife's twin sister. The group - which promotes healthy eating and youth sports - is under Ukrainian sanctions for its alleged role in a program of abducting Ukrainian children from occupied territories and relocating them under the guise of "rehabilitation." (Healthy Fatherland did not respond to a request for comment.)
Kremlev's cozy relationship with the government has made him rich. Putin used the levers of the state to make Kremlev a dominant player in the Russian sports betting industry, according to Proekt, and one of his companies was chosen to operate the national lottery. After Putin nationalized Russia's largest car dealership company in 2023, Kremlev became the owner of that too.
He now flaunts that wealth through his boisterous public persona. In one video Kremlev posted on social media, he surprises a young mother by giving her a free car. In another, he criticizes his young female aide's outfit as not feminine enough and makes her change. He shadowboxes with ostriches and brings in celebrities like Rick Ross and Naomi Campbell for IBA events; he praises Stalin and rides private jets.
Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, the U.S. began to indict Russian oligarchs and seize yachts and other assets. Kremlev repeatedly told associates he was worried about being targeted by a U.S. government probe, according to a person close to IBA leadership. "He was very afraid of American sanctions," the person added. (Kremlev does not appear on public U.S. sanction lists.)
With the business environment in Europe growing more hostile to Russia, Kremlev moved much of the IBA's operations from Switzerland to the United Arab Emirates. A new Dubai entity, IB Challenger, would later pay wedding expenses for Trump Jr. The current sources of the IBA's funds are murky, and, in recent years, top executives have given conflicting accounts of the status of its relationship with Gazprom. (Kremlev's press office told ProPublica the IBA's sponsorship contract with Gazprom "expired long ago.") People close to the organization said they understood that its money still comes from Russia.
In 2023, the International Olympic Committee stripped Kremlev's IBA of its role organizing Olympic boxing. It has cited a host of governance issues and the group's refusal to "transparently explain the sources of its financing or to explain its full financial dependency, at the time, on a single state-owned company."
It was a major setback that deprived the IBA of a key source of its international influence. Kremlev has raged against the Olympic committee ever since and has said that his IBA predecessor, who he blames for the problems, "must be shot."
Kremlev saw a potential ally in President Trump. After Trump's second inauguration, in January 2025, Kremlev sent an open letter to the president asking him to look into the Olympic committee's actions in advance of the 2028 Los Angeles Games. "We look forward with great optimism to the possibility of working together to make the Olympic movement great again," he wrote.
In September 2025, the IBA brought in Trump Jr. for a panel discussion in Istanbul about boxing. With his then-girlfriend, Anderson, sitting offstage, he criticized transgender women competing in women's sports and reminisced about watching Saturday night fights as a child. Trump Jr. shared the stage with Kremlev, the boxer Manny Pacquiao and Muhammad Ali's daughter Rasheda. (Trump Jr.'s spokesperson said he was not paid for the appearance and was already in Turkey for an unrelated event.)
The president's son had reason to be attuned to the sensitivity of cozying up with a Putin associate, especially while his father navigates the Russia-Ukraine war. Trump Jr.'s June 2016 meeting with a Russian attorney in Trump Tower became a major focus of the Robert Mueller investigation.
The Trump Tower meeting was arranged after an email offering Trump Jr. damaging information about Hillary Clinton as "part of Russia and its government's support for Mr. Trump." Trump Jr. famously responded, "If it's what you say I love it especially later in the summer." Trump Jr. later dismissed the matter as a "witch hunt," and the Mueller report concluded that there was not enough evidence to convict him of a crime.
Recently, Kremlev has been working to expand into the U.S. market. In July, his group hosted a bare-knuckle boxing event in Miami, a chance to showcase a particularly bloody form of the sport in which contenders fight without gloves. But the debut was overshadowed when manosphere influencer Andrew Tate, who the IBA had brought in to host, was arrested by U.S. Marshals outside the arena. (Tate is facing rape and sex trafficking charges in the United Kingdom, which he has denied.)
Much about Kremlev's relationship with Trump Jr., and where it is headed, remains unknown. In a press release after the Istanbul panel, the IBA hinted there was more to come.
"President Kremlev and Donald Trump Jr made it clear - this alliance will not remain symbolic," the press release read. "More joint initiatives will follow."