What Happened: Bipartisan leaders from the powerful House Energy and Commerce Committee launched an inquiry on Wednesday into the Amateur Athletic Union, criticizing the sprawling youth sports organization for its handling of child sexual abuse allegations and demanding answers, citing reporting by ProPublica and The Washington Post.
What They Said: "It is unacceptable that AAU is failing to implement standard reforms to protect child athletes, and is misleading the public, parents, and athletes about preventative measures in place within AAU sports," the letter reads.
The committee chair, Kentucky Republican Brett Guthrie, called ProPublica and The Post's reporting "deeply disturbing" in a statement on Thursday, saying it "raises serious questions about the organization's actions over the past decade."
"Our Committee is seeking information on how the AAU's policies have potentially fallen short, and what needs to be done in order to protect young athletes," Guthrie said."
The members of the committee, which in 2018 investigated systemic failures surrounding sexual abuse by former USA Gymnastics doctor Larry Nassar and others, said in the letter that they were "seeing parallels" between its past investigation and "what is being uncovered within the AAU today."
The letter is addressed to Jo Mirza, the AAU's president, and asks detailed questions about the organization's operations, taking the extra step of demanding a briefing from Mirza to the committee by Oct. 21. Among questions about its safety policies and coach training, the committee asks Mirza to lay out how many sexual abuse allegations the nonprofit receives each year and how many coaches it disciplines, information that has long been shrouded in secrecy. The AAU declined to provide the data to ProPublica and The Post. The AAU does not publish a list of banned coaches like many other youth sports groups do, and ProPublica and The Post found that it has used confidential arbitration clauses to keep lawsuits from child sexual abuse victims from being heard in open court.
The letter is signed by Guthrie, ranking Democrat Frank Pallone Jr. from New Jersey and representatives in charge of oversight and investigations.
Background: ProPublica and The Post found that the AAU, which has some 760,000 athletes and coaches nationwide, is failing on nearly every level to adequately protect young athletes from sexual abuse - breaking pledges it made in the wake of a 2011 sexual abuse scandal involving its CEO and young basketball players.
The investigation found that the AAU has become a haven for coaches suspected of abuse, according to a review of public disciplinary lists and interviews with current and former executives from six national sports governing bodies and other key stakeholders.
The AAU, the investigation found, does not offer child abuse prevention training, though it claims to the public that it does. And ProPublica and The Post found that it has suppressed allegations of sexual misconduct, including against another top executive in 2018.
Why It Matters: The committee is one of the key congressional groups charged with overseeing the federal youth sports safety system. It has the power to push for changes in child safety law - and to force transparency from organizations like the AAU, which has repeatedly failed to deliver on past promises of reform.
In 2018, in the wake of the allegations against Nassar, scrutiny from Congress led to the passage of a law known as the Safe Sport Act. It created the U.S. Center for SafeSport, an oversight group, to investigate allegations of sexual misconduct and gave it the power to suspend or ban coaches for life.
But SafeSport has jurisdiction only over national sports governing bodies, like USA Gymnastics and USA Volleyball, that are overseen by the Olympic and Paralympic Committee - meaning much of the law does not apply to the AAU.
The law does require "all amateur sports organizations" - not just governing bodies - to "offer and provide consistent training to all adult members ... regarding prevention and reporting of child abuse." The Energy and Commerce Committee's letter cites that provision of the law and demands that the AAU explain how it complies.
Response: In a statement, the AAU said, "As always, we will cooperate fully and respond appropriately to any questions or requests from congressional committees or U.S. government agencies."
Previously, the AAU told ProPublica and The Post that it is "committed to protecting its athletes through comprehensive protection policies overseen by our Compliance Department," and said it has an "ongoing commitment to providing a safe, secure, supportive, and trusted environment where athletes can thrive."