A renewable energy developer has pulled its controversial permit application to build an industrial-scale solar facility on an Eastern Washington mountain sacred to Indigenous nations.
Avangrid, a powerful player in the Northwest's push for green energy development, sought for at least five years to build a solar plant on Badger Mountain. The project site straddled private as well as public lands. The Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation and the Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation have protected rights to practice cultural traditions, such as food gathering and ceremonies, on Badger Mountain and other ancestral public lands.
A 2024 investigation by High Country News and ProPublica found that Avangrid and a consultant it retained, Tetra Tech, had omitted key archaeological and cultural information from a state-mandated review of the site, which would have been used for a solar farm. Avangrid continued pushing the project despite a state archaeologist's warning that the planned development would threaten significant historic sites and current ceremonial activity. An elected member of the Colville Tribal Business Council told the newsrooms at the time that the project would destroy roughly half the root vegetable harvest in the area.
An Avangrid spokesperson said then that the company had followed "all relevant law and regulation" with regard to the Badger Mountain solar project and had "taken additional steps to accommodate stakeholder feedback where possible."
It's unclear whether the company's decision to cancel the project had anything to do with Indigenous rights. Avangrid declined to clarify its reasoning to HCN.
The Colville Tribes chair, Cindy Marchand, praised the decision in a statement last week. "While the Colville Tribes certainly appreciates the value of renewable energy such as solar power, sacred sites must remain pristine to pass down to future generations."
After the publication of HCN and ProPublica's investigation, some members of the Wenatchi-P'squosa, one of the 12 Confederated Colville Tribes, held a demonstration on Badger Mountain, saying that while they support renewable energy, they're against facilities being built on important cultural sites. Following the demonstration, Avangrid announced that it would pause development to reconsider tribal input and public response. The public comment process is one of the only avenues available for tribal nations to advocate for their rights regarding land development.
At a meeting of the state's permitting authority council in July, an Avangrid senior director sought a continued pause of the permitting work, pointing to anticipated construction delays affecting the power grid. At the same meeting, the council chair, Kurt Beckett, characterized concerns over the project's environmental and cultural impacts as "noise," but he also said tribal objections should be considered in the state's permitting decision.
Five days later, Avangrid filed a request to completely withdraw its proposal. And last week, the permitting council formally announced the withdrawal and said it was "closing out existing financial arrangements and notifying interested and agency partners." It did not provide further comment, referring questions to the developer. The state Department of Natural Resources, which owns the public parcel on Badger Mountain, said it had not received any other requests to develop it for clean energy projects at this time, and a spokesperson did not have additional information about future plans for the site.
No matter the reason for the project's cancellation at Badger Mountain, the outcome is a good one, said Steven Wynecoop, vice chair of the Wenatchi Advisory Group, an independent body that advises the Colville Tribal Business Council and that organized the 2024 Badger Mountain demonstration.
The mountain is a "very sacred site to us," said Wynecoop, grandson of the Wenatchi Advisory Group founder Matthew Dick. "Generations, we've been going to that mountain for plenty of reasons: medicines, foods like roots and berries."