A Texas volleyball coach who was the subject of an investigation last month by ProPublica and The Washington Post is now facing a federal child exploitation probe, according to an agent for Homeland Security Investigations, the main investigative arm of the Department of Homeland Security.
The ProPublica and Post story detailed how Ryan Richardson continued to coach teenage girls for years at his gym in Pharr, Texas, amid allegations of misconduct, even after he was suspended in early 2025 and subsequently ruled "permanently ineligible" this February by the U.S. Center for SafeSport, an oversight group. On its public disciplinary list, SafeSport said it found that Richardson had an intimate relationship with a minor, committed sexual misconduct involving a minor, and engaged in physical misconduct and bullying.
Juan J. Flores Jr., a supervisor in a Homeland Security Investigations unit that focuses on child exploitation in the Rio Grande Valley, told ProPublica and The Post that he had launched the probe into Richardson in response to the story, which included allegations from a parent and former players that he had a sexual relationship with a 16-year-old player beginning in 2022 and that he groomed and emotionally and physically abused others.
"My plan is to turn over every rock, have every conversation. I know he's still coaching," Flores said.
Richardson did not respond to multiple requests for comment on ProPublica and The Post's reporting or to an email seeking a comment for this story. When he was first suspended in 2024 by Lone Star Region Volleyball, the organization overseeing volleyball in Texas, Richardson told the local news website MyRGV that complaints about him were an effort to "retaliate and defame someone's character," and said he "would never do anything to risk the physical or mental wellbeing of these strong young ladies."
A spokesperson for the Department of Homeland Security said HSI was "a global leader in the fight against child exploitation" but said it was "unable to confirm or deny any ongoing investigations."
ProPublica and The Post published excerpts of Snapchat messages between Richardson and a former player, including from August 2022, when the girl was 16. In those messages, Richardson and the girl said "I love you" to each other and planned when they would next meet up. In a message in May 2023, when the girl was 17, Richardson wrote, "I don't like that we are only sex right now so I really would love to get past this high school Shit when you are on your own pretty much." The Snapchat messages were part of an investigation conducted by SafeSport.
The mother of the former player, Maggie Gutierrez, said that in the summer of 2022, she discovered Richardson alone with her 16-year-old daughter in the darkened back room of his gym, which at the time contained a twin mattress. Richardson turned his back to her and appeared to be tying up the string of his pants, Gutierrez said. At the time, Richardson and Gutierrez's daughter denied anything inappropriate had happened. (ProPublica and The Post, which do not name alleged victims of sexual abuse without their consent, are referring to Gutierrez by her maiden name to avoid identifying her daughter, who declined to be interviewed.)
Gutierrez went to the police in both Pharr and McAllen in early 2024, she told ProPublica and The Post, after her daughter's college volleyball coach told her that he believed Richardson and her daughter, then 18, were dating.
She said police declined to pursue the case because her daughter was a legal adult and did not want to speak to police officers.
Police in both jurisdictions denied records requests from ProPublica and The Post by citing an exemption under state privacy statutes, but the news organizations obtained excerpts from the police report in McAllen. In the text, an officer described meeting with Gutierrez at the McAllen police station.
The officer wrote that due to Gutierrez's daughter "being 18 years of age, which as per Texas law is considered an adult and an age which gives her the right to consent, case would not be further investigated and closed."
Gutierrez then reported her concerns to Lone Star, the regional arm of USA Volleyball, which governs the sport. Officials referred the matter to SafeSport, which opened an investigation.
Gutierrez spoke to the Homeland Security investigator last week, she told ProPublica and The Post.
Flores said his inquiry would also involve looking into the actions of both police departments that declined to pursue a case against Richardson.
Police in Pharr and McAllen did not respond to requests for comment.