My colleagues and I had been digging for days. We'd heard a rumor that a Russian oligarch close to President Vladimir Putin named Umar Kremlev had attended Donald Trump Jr.'s wedding this past May in the Bahamas. But to confirm that, we needed visual proof.
First, we scoured everything the Trumps had released from the event, held on a pair of private islands. On social media and in the pages of tabloids such as Page Six and Hello! magazine, official photos from the weekend showed an intimate chapel ceremony alongside lavish beach parties. Several photos depicted guests, including Jared Kushner and Eric Trump, and we scanned them all for signs of Kremlev. Still, nothing had turned up yet.
We then turned to Kremlev's social media profiles on the off chance that he'd posted about the wedding. Incredibly, on Telegram, Kremlev had posted videos over the same weekend as Trump Jr.'s wedding that appeared to be from someplace tropical. In one, a single detail caught our attention: As Kremlev speaks in Russian to the camera, the frame gives a partial view of an outdoor patio setting. It wasn't palm trees or crystal water we noticed, but the wicker furniture.
The chair and its affixed cushion in Kremlev's post matched what we'd seen in photos of the private islands elsewhere online, such as the promotional image below:
But of course, we couldn't hang such a big claim - that this Russian oligarch had attended the president's son's intimate wedding weekend - on a wicker chair analysis. The Trump family appeared to be curating the wedding's visual footprint, and not much seemed to exist outside of its control.
So when my colleagues Justin Elliott, Brett Murphy, Joshua Kaplan and I finally found a photo that confirmed what we'd been looking for, we were floored. The proof had been hiding in an Instagram gallery posted months earlier by a swimsuit model and friend of the bride, nestled among glamour shots and lifestyle photos.
The sunset group shot on a white sand beach shows wedding guests, barefoot and smiling against a backdrop of palms. One guest throws up a shaka. Front and center is the president's eldest son and his bride, Bettina Trump, surrounded by close friends and family.
But in the back row, just behind the newlyweds, the top half of a man's shaved head is visible.
We recognized him instantly: Kremlev.
That photo was at the center of our story this week, in which we revealed that Kremlev secretly bankrolled much of Trump Jr.'s wedding weekend, paying to rent out a private island, among other big-ticket items, according to records reviewed by ProPublica and interviews with three people familiar with the events. The photo also showed two others associated with Kremlev, part of a larger group of Russians whose presence puzzled some attendees. That made their absence from all other official wedding photos all the more noteworthy - especially for a gathering of only 50 or so guests.
The story spread quickly. Within hours of publication, the top Democrat on the House Oversight Committee opened an investigation into Trump Jr.'s relationship with Kremlev, asking for communications between the two and records of "all purchases made for your wedding by foreign nationals." (Trump Jr. did not respond to a request for comment on the investigation.) It also prompted Bettina Trump to post a joint statement with Trump Jr. on her Instagram, which included even more photos from the wedding weekend.
In response to detailed questions, a spokesperson for Trump Jr. did not dispute the wedding payments from Kremlev. "Umar is a personal friend of Don," he said. The spokesperson said that Kremlev is "not someone he has a business relationship with." In a statement, Kremlev's press office said, "Mr. Kremlev and Mr. Trump Jr have a friendly relationship," and they first met "a couple of years ago."
Other than the photo we've shared, the images from that weekend remain tightly curated and don't seem to tell the full story. So we thought we'd share a few examples with the added context from our findings. Sometimes, what - or, in this case, who - isn't pictured is just as important as what is.
The Setting
The weekend festivities were spread across two ultra-exclusive private islands in the Exumas, a chain of storybook Caribbean destinations with white sand beaches and brilliant turquoise water. Islands there have been owned by the likes of Johnny Depp, David Copperfield and LVMH CEO Bernard Arnault. People arrived by helicopter and seaplanes to infinity pools and oceanfront villas.
The island where Trump Jr. and his bride exchanged vows on Friday was featured in "Pirates of the Caribbean" and "Casino Royale." (Kremlev was not present for the Friday ceremony, which involved an even smaller group.)
On a second nearby island, about 10 minutes by boat from where the ceremony took place, a reception party was held. This island can rent for around $100,000 per night, and Kremlev paid for multiple nights.
The Caribbean-Themed Party
On the second night, more guests arrived for a party on the same island where the ceremony took place. The evening was Caribbean themed, with a beachside DJ and a performance by a Junkanoo band. On Instagram, Bettina Trump described the night as "an unforgettable night of pure joy, music, sunset, and dancing barefoot in the sand, surrounded by nothing but love in paradise...It was everything we dreamed of and more... pure magic."
Among the guests was Kremlev, arriving just days after accompanying Putin in China as part of a Russian delegation, according to Chinese state media. (Kremlev's press office said that he was not part of Putin's "official delegation" in China.) Kremlev's ties to Putin and the Russian security services prompted the Ukrainian government to impose sanctions on him personally.
In their joint statement on Instagram, the couple said that Kremlev paid for the parties on both the second and third night of their wedding weekend, but they drew a distinction between the ceremony itself and the rest of the events.
"Our dear friend Umar very generously hosted two incredible nights of celebrations for us AFTER our wedding. It was an extraordinarily generous wedding gift from a friend, and something for which we were and remain incredibly grateful," the couple wrote.
The First Dance
On Sunday, the newlyweds shared their first dance to Elvis Presley's "Can't Help Falling in Love." Photos published in Hello! magazine showed the couple on the dance floor underneath disco balls strung up among palm trees. They embraced as guests watched. Bettina Trump wore her wedding dress. The night was nautical themed, complete with a seafood boat buffet, an illusionist and scantily clad dancers in stilettos and sailor outfits.
The wedding payments came from a Dubai entity affiliated with the International Boxing Association, a scandal-plagued sports group that Kremlev heads. The IBA has been financed by the Russian state-owned energy giant Gazprom. Kremlev picked up the tab for the festivities on Saturday and Sunday.
Kremlev's press office described him as a businessman and philanthropist, adding, "Mr. Kremlev has never discussed political matters with any of his American friends and acquaintances," including Trump Jr. It said the boxing organization itself did not incur expenses for the wedding but did not comment on the payments from the Dubai entity.
The Fireworks
At the Sunday reception, Trump Jr. and his new wife stood on the beach, gazing out as a barge launched a spectacular fireworks display over the ocean. It was an extravagant cap off the wedding weekend.
Kremlev picked up the tab for the fireworks display. The company that put it on typically charges around $70,000 for such shows.
There are still lingering questions we didn't get to the bottom of. Among the most pressing: Why did a Russian oligarch who is close to Putin pay for much of the president's son's wedding? What is the nature of Trump Jr.'s relationship with Kremlev, and, importantly, how might it change over time? Frank Montoya Jr., a retired career FBI official who held senior counterintelligence roles, put it this way:
"If I'm paying for your wedding, at some point, you're going to owe me something."
Do You Have Information We Should Know About Donald Trump Jr.?
We're still reporting. If you know anything about Trump Jr., his businesses or his relationship with Umar Kremlev, please get in touch.
Alex Mierjeski