In the summer of 2023, after he was impeached on charges of abusing his office for personal gain, Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton was suspended and barred from conducting any official business for more than three months while awaiting trial in the state Senate.
So, he traveled.
Paxton, a Republican who is now running for U.S. Senate, took at least 17 trips over three months, including to resort destinations Park City, Utah, and Vail, Colorado. He visited the Oklahoma town where he owns a vacation lodge and a Utah community with a golf resort, where he later bought four condominiums.
State police joined him each time, costing taxpayers tens of thousands of dollars for trips unrelated to his job as attorney general. The Texas Senate ultimately acquitted him on the impeachment charges.
But Paxton's use of the taxpayer-funded detail did not begin or end there. In fact, it stands out compared with his predecessor, fellow elected officials in Texas and other state attorneys general, ProPublica and The Texas Tribune found.
Paxton has traveled frequently out of state while listing little on his official calendar, The Associated Press reported last week. ProPublica and the Tribune's analysis, which included reviewing every publicly available document Paxton's office says it possesses about his travel, discloses for the first time how few of his trips had a listed business purpose: just 1 in 6.
It also found Paxton's security has cost taxpayers far more than has previously been reported.
Since assuming office in 2015, Paxton has taken nearly 1,000 trips with a state-funded security detail, costing $3.3 million. The newsrooms' review of Paxton's travel records, obtained through the state's Public Information Act, could only connect 138 of those trips and $553,000 in security costs to state business.
Records detailing the purpose of Paxton's visits to 36 states and 19 countries do not appear to exist in most cases. These include a trip to a small town in Hawaii months before his family's blind trust bought land there; 24 trips to Utah, where the trust owns five properties; and 53 trips to Florida, where Paxton and the trust have two houses and a townhome.
"If you've got all these extra trips, it becomes ethically and morally problematic," said Chris Toth, former executive director of the National Association of Attorneys General, who has also criticized Paxton's conduct on other issues. "The ethical question is whether a legitimate security function has effectively become a taxpayer-funded subsidy."
Texas law allows the Department of Public Safety to provide security for key state leaders, including the attorney general, but does not require officials to use it. In fact, Paxton himself hasn't used it in at least two dozen cases while traveling on official business.
Paxton has dismissed opponents' attacks that he has used the perks of office to benefit himself and has not answered questions about how he vastly increased his wealth as a public servant.
He also did not answer detailed questions for this story. ProPublica and the Tribune sent Paxton a spreadsheet detailing travel for which there was no record that he was on state business and asked him to provide additional information if the trips were not personal. Neither Paxton nor his office provided such records. Instead, his office provided a general statement.
"Throughout his career, Ken Paxton has faced numerous security threats stemming from his courageous work as Attorney General fighting on behalf of the people of Texas," his office said in the statement. "Those threats are a direct result of him taking on the cartels terrorizing Texans and some of the nation's most dangerous violent criminals."
Paxton's office directed additional questions to DPS.
A DPS spokesperson declined to answer the newsrooms' questions, saying the agency does not comment on its security arrangements.
An Outlier Among Peers
To analyze Paxton's travel, ProPublica and the Tribune reviewed DPS logs for his security detail and records from the attorney general's office, including airfare and lodging receipts, per diems and his daily calendars.
The records available for his predecessor, Greg Abbott, show a stark difference: Abbott traveled mostly within the state as attorney general, and his security cost $203,000 during his last three years in the office. Adjusted for inflation, Abbott's security detail cost $7,400 per month. Paxton's has averaged $24,300.
Because the state keeps records only for a limited time, Abbott's travel expenses and his daily calendars as attorney general no longer exist, so the news organizations could not determine how many of his trips were for business.
Records are available, however, for Abbott's security costs as governor and for Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick. Both are also offered state police security and have been in their current roles as long as Paxton.
When compared, the records show Paxton has taken 82 more out-of-state trips with a security detail than Abbott and nearly as many as the governor and lieutenant governor combined.
Though DPS security detail records are available for state leaders' full tenure, Abbott's office only provided calendars that document business-related activity for his first six years in office. More than two-thirds of the governor's international trips during those years had a listed business purpose, compared with just two of 25 for Paxton during his full tenure. The governor's office said it planned to release the remaining five years on Tuesday but only provided five months, saying it needed more time.
The attorney general's records do not show a business purpose for travel to Albania, Aruba, Australia, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, the Dominican Republic, England, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Malta, Mexico, Poland, South Africa or Taiwan.
The share of Paxton's travel with a documented business purpose peaked early in his tenure, in 2018 and 2019, at 30%, the newsrooms' analysis found. That aligns with the governor's share of business travel during that period.
Since then, Paxton has taken fewer trips that are documented as state business while increasingly traveling out of state. Last year, just five of Paxton's 91 trips with the security detail had a listed business purpose. Forty-one were outside Texas.
In some cases, Paxton has taken business trips without a DPS detail, an analysis of records from the department and the attorney general's office shows. They include a 2019 meeting in Nashville, Tennessee, with that state's attorney general to discuss opioid litigation and a 2021 visit with unnamed U.S. senators in North Carolina. There is also no record of Paxton taking the detail on political fundraising trips to Florida and the Bahamas.
But Paxton has traveled with security to other campaign-related activities, including one that came just two days after he was acquitted in the impeachment trial. Paxton boarded a Maine-bound private plane owned by a North Texas businessman to tape an episode of Tucker Carlson's show, according to campaign finance records. During the interview, he hinted that he'd challenge U.S. Sen. John Cornyn in the 2026 Republican primary.
"Everything is on the table for me," Paxton said when Carlson suggested he should run.
In his interview with Carlson, Paxton said it was unfair that he was automatically suspended before he could clear his name. He said he was eager to get back to work and that he was "reenergized to do the things the voters sent me to do."
Paxton should pay for his own security on trips where there is no benefit for Texans, like vacations and campaign events, said Richard Briffault, a professor at Columbia Law School who has written about government ethics.
"There's no reason for the taxpayers to be paying for things that they would not be paying for if he had stayed home," Briffault said. "That's a misuse of public funds."
State officials said there are no records of Paxton or his campaign reimbursing Texas for security costs.
Of the 10 most populous states, Texas and New York confirmed that they provide security for their attorneys general, while Florida law allows its top lawyer to receive a detail upon request. North Carolina does not. Attorneys general offices for the remaining six states did not respond to requests for comment.
Former Oregon Attorney General Ellen Rosenblum said she never used a security detail during her 12 years in office, which ended in 2024. The Democrat said that Paxton's higher profile might create a greater need for protection, but his extensive out-of-state travel without a documented business purpose raises questions about his workload.
"Was he minding the store? There's a lot of work to be done at the office," Rosenblum said.
Travel and Real Estate
Some of Paxton's travel to four states with a security detail has overlapped with locations where he or his family's trust has purchased 10 properties since 2021. A recent ProPublica and Tribune analysis found he owns or co-owns 15 properties with a market value of about $11 million.
In June 2021, Paxton attended an attorneys general conference in Maui. The security detail listed the destination as Lahaina, a small community on the Hawaiian island's west coast. Four months later, Paxton's family trust purchased an oceanview lot in a residential neighborhood there for $410,000, land records show.
The 7,000-square-foot lot remains vacant but has proved to be a savvy investment, now assessed at $1.2 million by Maui County.
Paxton set up the trust with his estranged wife, State Sen. Angela Paxton, who declined to be interviewed but said through a spokesperson that she has not been involved in her husband's business dealings since 2024, when she filed for divorce. The Paxtons' friend, Chip Loper, runs the trust. He did not respond to requests for comment.
Paxton has also gone to the Salt Lake City area 19 times, twice for listed business purposes. He visited three times - once on business - in the months leading up to his family trust's July 2021 purchase of a plot in the ski town of Eden. The trust bought a mountainside lot on about two-thirds of an acre for $315,000 in cash, the seller told the newsrooms. It also remains undeveloped.
During his suspension in August 2023, Paxton visited St. George, Utah, a small city in the state's southwest corner. Nearby is the Black Desert Resort, which hosts an annual PGA Tour golf tournament. Paxton purchased one condo at the resort in 2025 and three more in February. Paxton took out mortgages totaling $1.9 million for them, according to legal documents filed with the local county.
Paxton has visited Florida more than any other state, 53 times. Two of those trips have a documented business purpose. Between 2021 and 2022, Paxton purchased two homes in Ocala, known for its horse breeding industry, and a townhome in Dunedin, on the Gulf of Mexico near Tampa.
Paxton also traveled with the detail twice to Broken Bow, Oklahoma, where he purchased a $1.5 million vacation lodge in 2022. He visited in June 2023, during his suspension. Then again the following December. He traveled to the neighboring town of Idabel in 2023 and 2024. None of the trips had a listed business purpose.
Records that show travel with a security detail do not list the attorney general's name but rather the position. State officials familiar with the travel records said the two temporary attorneys general appointed during Paxton's suspension did not take the trips listed on the state police travel logs.
The attorney general's office has said that Paxton's work to secure large legal settlements with drugmakers and tech companies requires routine travel. Such travel is noted in calendars reviewed by ProPublica and the Tribune. Even so, more than 800 trips lack a documented business purpose.
Paul Nolette, a Marquette University political science professor who studies attorneys general, said that the role has become more expansive in recent years as states increasingly collaborate on big lawsuits. That could lead to more travel, he said. Nolette added these officials deserve occasional vacations like everyday Americans.
But given repeated accusations from Democrats and Republicans alike about Paxton's ethics, Nolette said it is difficult to give him the benefit of the doubt that he's constantly working while leaving the state so frequently.
"It just raises more red flags about how he's using the office to do things that may not give the best bang for the buck for Texans," Nolette said.
Paxton has not commented publicly about his use of the taxpayer-funded detail. During a podcast interview in November, Houston lawyer Tony Buzbee, who led his impeachment defense, asked the attorney general where he liked to travel.
"I love Jackson Hole. I like Park City. I like the mountains. I also like beaches," Paxton responded. "I like places in Florida, places in California, even though I don't like to admit I go to California. But it's beautiful to see them."