The first emergency call about a detainee trying to harm himself came about a month after Camp East Montana - an immigration detention center in El Paso, Texas - started to house immigrants. It was 2:50 p.m. on Friday, Sept. 12.
"We have a patient currently in holding who is saying he's got suicidal ideations, swallowed some foreign object, has refused our basic medical care here," a nurse told the operator. In the audio, you can hear that someone is moaning and yelling in the background.
"At this point he is unable to speak and rolling on the floor in agonizing pain, holding his stomach," the nurse continued. "A preliminary X-ray was done and a foreign object was found. We just need to take him to the hospital that's closest so that they can verify if the object is currently in his system and possibly to excavate the object."
Listen to the Call
I've been reporting on Camp East Montana for months. It sits on barren military land and was supposed to be a model for how the Trump administration would carry out mass deportations. Instead, it became an example of what could go wrong. It remains in operation despite claims of inhumane conditions and abuse, which Department of Homeland Security officials have said are "categorically false." ICE plans to keep the facility running at least through Sept. 30, 2027, The Associated Press reported.
In the span of six weeks between December 2025 and January 2026, three men died at Camp East Montana, making it one of the country's deadliest detention centers at the time.
In July, ProPublica and The Texas Tribune published my investigation into the Jan. 3 death of one of those men, Geraldo Lunas Campos, a 55-year-old Cuban national with a history of mental illness. He died after an altercation with guards over his medication, and a medical examiner ruled Lunas Campos' death a homicide. (The Trump administration initially claimed that he had experienced medical distress, but Department of Homeland Security officials later said guards had used force to keep him from killing himself.)
We found that Lunas Campos had repeatedly raised concerns about his mental health while detained at Camp East Montana. Records show staff didn't transfer him to a facility that could better care for him, despite repeatedly saying they were working to do so.
I wanted to understand more about how the facility was responding to such incidents. I obtained, via public records requests, recordings of more than 160 emergency calls, and I spoke with staff, government officials familiar with the facility, detainees, lawyers and advocates who had spent time inside the detention center.
I asked DHS about my reporting and some of the 911 calls. A spokesperson did not comment on the specific issues identified in the calls, but said the facility provides "comprehensive medical services, including mental health services." If the detainee requires a higher level of medical care, they are referred to local emergency services as needed, the spokesperson said. The official also said that for many immigrant detainees, the healthcare they get while in custody is the best they've gotten in their lives.
Now I want to share some of those 911 calls with you. While they may be difficult to listen to or read about, they offer a glimpse into what's happening in a place reporters don't have access to. The calls and my investigation show failures in responding to mental health and medical emergencies that extend beyond those experienced by one man. (Note: In some cases, recordings were edited to remove long stretches where no one was talking.)
Oct. 12, 2025: "They will not give them medical treatment."
Two months after Camp East Montana began holding detainees, some were growing so desperate that they were having friends and relatives call 911 to seek medical help on their behalf. A man from North Texas called three times on Oct. 12, trying to get a detainee, whom he identified as his partner, emergency care for his kidney stones.
Listen to the Call
"Why isn't the facility calling?" the operator asked.
"Because they don't care. They don't care about any of the detainees. They will not give them medical treatment; they don't care. ... He does not like to go to the hospital. So when he is saying he is in emergent pain at a level of 10 out of 10 and he needs to go to the emergency room, it is no joke; it has got to be very, very serious."
In a declaration to lawyers, a 32-year-old Venezuelan man identified by a pseudonym, Xavier, who fits the profile of the man with kidney stones, said he had gone on a hunger strike because he was not getting any information about his case or about a court date. "Being here feels like torture," he said. "I feel like this experience is finishing me emotionally and physically. I don't feel like I can survive for another month at this place. They treat us like animals."
Nov. 2, 2025: "We don't have any oxygen for her."
In some of the emergency calls, the medical providers themselves lamented how little they could do for their patients.
Listen to the Call
A nurse at the facility dialed 911. She said she had a 46-year-old woman with COVID-19 who was short of breath and whose oxygen saturation was dropping. "But the issue is we don't have any oxygen for her, especially if she does start desaturating even more," she tells the operator. "She just doesn't look good."
"OK. Let me request assistance, OK? Just bear with me," the operator tells her.
"Apparently she's been sick for the last couple of days and she's asked to be brought into the clinic and they hadn't brought her in," the nurse explains later in the call. "She was just brought in today, bless her heart, so I'm just worried about her."
Feb. 28, 2026: "Was this accidental or intentional?"
By late February, three people had died at Camp East Montana. The first one was Francisco Gaspar-Andres, a 48-year-old Guatemalan man who died on Dec. 3, 2025, of liver and kidney failure. Then came Lunas Campos' death on Jan. 3. Less than two weeks later, ICE reported that Victor Manuel Díaz, a 36-year-old Nicaraguan who had been detained during Operation Metro Surge in Minneapolis, was found unresponsive and with a piece of fabric around his neck. His autopsy has not been made public.
Listen to the Call
Still, the 911 calls kept coming.
"OK, we have a guy who's overdosed. He's a detainee," a nurse told an emergency operator on Feb. 28.
They didn't know much about the 60-year-old man who had just arrived at Camp East Montana or about what he had taken about an hour ago, she said. Someone had seen him "popping pills" and stumbling around.
"Was this accidental or intentional?" the operator asked.
"Intentional," she said.