Walmart, Goldman Sachs, JD Power issue red alert over US consumers - and your nest egg takes the biggest hit
Moneywise and Yahoo Finance LLC may earn commission or revenue through links in the content below.
Something is changing beneath the surface of the American economy - and three very different companies are now picking up warning signs from consumers.
Take Walmart. More than 150 million U.S. customers visit its stores and websites each week, giving the retail giant a front-row seat to changes in how Americans spend.
Must Read
- Jeff Bezos backs a platform that lets anyone invest in rental homes for as little as $100 - 6 ways to build wealth like a landlord without actually being one
- JPMorgan sees gold hitting $5,000/oz by Q4 - and savvy investors are protecting their wealth with a tax-advantaged Gold IRA. Get your free guide from Priority Gold
- The tax breaks in Trump's 'big beautiful bill' expire after 2028. Here are 4 moves to make before the window closes
Walmart CEO John Furner has identified one particular source of pressure.
"That's really the stress point, is the price of fuel," Furner said (1), adding, "Hopefully, we see some relief on energy prices."
And one group of Americans has been hit particularly hard.
"We've seen some more signs of stress at the lower income levels," Furner said (2).
Likewise, Walmart CFO John David Rainey has pointed to an even more tangible sign of the squeeze: Customers were filling their gas tanks with fewer than 10 gallons (3) per visit on average.
Goldman Sachs sees the pressure spreading more broadly.
The investment bank expects (4) real consumer-spending growth to slow to between just 1% and 1.5% in the second half of 2026, down from a 2.5% annual growth pace in June. At the low end of that range, it would mark the weakest growth since early 2021.
Goldman pointed to the fading boost from large tax refunds in the spring as well as continued pressure from elevated energy prices. Oil prices have surged since the Iran war began, putting additional strain on household purchasing power.
But perhaps the starkest red alert comes from JD Power.
Its latest Financial Health Report (5), released Aug. 24, found that 66% of U.S. consumers were "financially unhealthy" in July. Even more striking, 77% said they had changed their day-to-day spending because of mounting costs.
Some of those changes go far beyond skipping dinner out.
JD Power found that 27% of consumers had cut back on groceries or skipped meals, 18% had borrowed from friends or family to cover expenses, 14% had sold personal belongings and 9% had missed rent, mortgage or utility payments. Another 9% had skipped a prescription or rationed medication because of cost.