Johnson & Johnson (JNJ) Raised Its Outlook. Is It the Better Healthcare Stock to Own After Earnings?
Johnson & Johnson (NYSE:JNJ) delivered strong fiscal Q2 2026 results, with sales for the quarter growing nearly 7% to $25.31 billion, above analysts' average estimate of about $25.05 billion. Adjusted earnings per share reached $2.90, surpassing the expectation of $2.85. The company also raised its full-year guidance and is on track to surpass $100 billion in annual revenue in 2026 for the first time in its 140-year history.
The company's results suggest that its strategy of offsetting patent-related headwinds with newer growth products is gaining traction, an encouraging sign for long-term investors. So, is it a better healthcare stock to own after earnings?
Bull Case
Johnson & Johnson's (NYSE:JNJ) pharmaceutical unit helped increase total sales, generating $16.38 billion in quarterly sales and exceeding analysts' estimate of $16.1 billion. The healthcare giant now expects its annual sales to be around $101.1 billion at the midpoint, compared with $100.8 billion previously. In another optimistic feat, it raised its adjusted earnings per share forecast to $11.68 at the midpoint, from a previous $11.55 per share.
Revenue from Johnson & Johnson's (NYSE:JNJ) Stelara, which treats psoriasis, Crohn's disease, and other autoimmune conditions, dropped over 55% in the quarter to $740 million due to patent loss. However, the company's cancer and newer immunology drugs can be seen countering this loss, as sales of Tremfya, its psoriasis and inflammatory bowel disease drug, rose 72.5% to $2 billion, considerably exceeding the estimate of $1.74 billion.
The most encouraging sign for investors may thus be Johnson & Johnson's (NYSE:JNJ) ability to absorb a significant patent-related decline in Stelara sales while still raising its full-year outlook. Strong performance from newer drugs such as Tremfya suggests the company's pipeline is successfully offsetting losses from older products, and this marked one of the reasons the company was upgraded to Buy from Hold by Freedom Broker, with the firm lifting the price target to $280 from $230 due to "a strong quarterly performance" that exceeded both consensus forecasts and the firm's estimates.
The firm raised its confidence in the company's goal to exceed its strategic target of $100 billion in revenue in 2026, supported primarily by factors such as Johnson & Johnson's (NYSE:JNJ) improving investor sentiment towards the healthcare sector, solid progress on its key growth drivers, raised full-year revenue and EPS guidance, and "above all, its new medicines".