A stolen wallet gives thieves access to your identity and finances - here's what to do before the damage spreads
Moneywise and Yahoo Finance LLC may earn commission or revenue through links in the content below.
In April 2026, wallets, purses, and other belongings started disappearing out of cars parked around fitness centers across Fairfax County in Alexandria, Virginia, according to The Alexandria Brief (1). In late June, the Alexandria Police Department arrested a man who they say was taking these belongings from unlocked cars and using stolen credit cards to purchase gift cards at nearby retailers before the victims realized their things had been stolen.
While cash and credit cards are the obvious targets in wallet theft, your personal identification may be even more valuable in the wrong hands. Documents often found in your wallet, like your social security card, driver's license, and health insurance card can give thieves access to your identity and finances. If left unchecked, you could be liable for the damage someone else causes in your name.
Must Read
- Jeff Bezos backs a platform that lets anyone invest in rental homes for as little as $100 - 6 ways to build wealth like a landlord without actually being one
- JPMorgan sees gold hitting $5,000/oz by Q4 - and savvy investors are protecting their wealth with a tax-advantaged Gold IRA. Get your free guide from Priority Gold
- The tax breaks in Trump's 'big beautiful bill' expire after 2028. Here are 4 moves to make before the window closes
Here's what to do if your wallet is stolen and how to mitigate the risks of identity theft.
What to do if your wallet is stolen
How you react to a stolen or lost wallet will depend on what you carry in it. Regardless, time is of the essence.
If you report your debit card missing before any unauthorized charges are made, you are not responsible for any of those charges. You'll be responsible for up to $50 (2) if you report a missing debit card within two business days of an unauthorized charge, according to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). After two business days, but within 60 calendar days after your statement is sent to you, you'll be responsible for up to $500 of unauthorized charges. Beyond 60 calendar days, any money in your accounts is unprotected. Someone with your debit card could clean out your account - and possibly any accounts linked to your debit - and you'll be left with no recourse.
You have more protections with unauthorized credit card charges. You're only responsible for up to $50 under the Fair Credit Billing Act (3). However, most credit cards and some debit cards have zero-liability fraud protection, which means cardholders aren't responsible for unauthorized charges as long as they report it.