While much was made of Elon Musk becoming a trillionaire earlier this year, the world's richest man could see his fortune near or top $2 trillion if he decides to use SpaceX [NASDAQ: SPCX] to acquire Tesla [NASDAQ: TSLA].
Speculation has been growing steadily since the SpaceX IPO that Musk could consolidate his business empire, though he has made no public comments about doing so. Should he decide to, however, The Wall Street Journal reports such a move could trigger a clause in Musk's contract that would accelerate a tremendous payday package, which the company approved last November.
Must Read
- Jeff Bezos backs a platform that lets anyone invest in rental homes for as little as $100 - 6 ways to build wealth like a landlord without actually being one
- Dave Ramsey warns nearly 50% of Americans are making 1 big Social Security mistake. Here's what it is and 3 simple steps to fix it ASAP
- Millionaires under 43 hold only 25% of their wealth in stocks. Here's where their money is actually going
A line buried in the contract, at the bottom of the fifth page, declares half of the targets Musk previously had to meet to earn the payout would be considered met if Tesla is acquired or taken over.
A longshot gets a lot closer
Musk reportedly lobbied for the $1 trillion pay package and even indicated he could leave the company if it wasn't approved. Still, the package was seen by many as a long shot of ever being realized.
The agreement was made up of 12 tranches of shares to be granted to Musk if Tesla hit certain milestones in the next decade.
The first of those required Tesla to hit a market capitalization of $2 trillion. (The company currently has a market cap of $1.04 trillion, which is considerably less than Tesla's $1.54 trillion evaluation last November.) The next nine tranches see Musk earning more stock each time Tesla's value increases by $500 billion, up to $6.5 trillion.
The final two required market cap rises of $1 trillion each, which means Tesla would need to hit a market cap of $8.5 trillion for Musk to get the full package.
The Journal laid out a SpaceX offer that valued Tesla at a 54% premium, making it a $2 trillion deal. In an all-stock deal, Tesla shareholders would receive 3.8 shares in the combined company for each share they own.
Musk, meanwhile, would retain complete operational control of both companies. His Class B shares have 10 times the voting power of publicly traded Class A shares, giving him 73% of the voting power at SpaceX. Even if the deal values Tesla at a whopping $8.5 trillion, he would retain 56% of the voting power.