Find out how much you could earn by locking in a high CD rate today. The Federal Reserve cut its federal funds rate three times in 2025. So far in 2026, the Fed has left interest rates alone, and so now could be your last chance to lock in a competitive CD rate before rates move further. CD rates vary widely across financial institutions, so it's important to ensure you're getting the best rate possible when shopping around for a CD.
The following is a breakdown of CD rates today and where to find the best offers.
CD rates today, Saturday, August 29, 2026
Generally, the best CD rates today are offered on shorter terms of around one year or less. Online banks and credit unions, in particular, offer the top CD rates.
Today, Saturday, August 29, 2026, the highest CD rate is 4.30%. Synchrony Bank offers this rate on its 16-month CD, and Marcus by Goldman Sachs offers it on its 18-month CD.
Here is a look at some of the best CD rates available today:
How much interest can I earn with a CD?
The amount of interest you can earn from a CD depends on the annual percentage rate (APY). This is a measure of your total earnings after one year, taking into account the base interest rate and how often interest compounds (CD interest typically compounds daily or monthly).
Say you invest $1,000 in a one-year CD with 1.52% APY, and interest compounds monthly. At the end of that year, your balance would grow to $1,015.20 - your initial $1,000 deposit, plus $15.20 in interest.
Now let's say you choose a one-year CD that offers 4% APY instead. In this case, your balance would grow to $1,040.74 over the same period, which includes $40.74 in interest.
The more you deposit in a CD, the more you stand to earn. If we used the same example of a one-year CD at 4% APY but deposited $10,000, your total balance when the CD matures would be $10,407.42, meaning you'd earn $407.42 in interest.
Types of CDs
When choosing a CD, the interest rate is usually top of mind. However, the rate isn't the only factor you should consider. There are several types of CDs that offer different benefits, though you may need to accept a slightly lower interest rate in exchange for more flexibility. Here's a look at some of the common types of CDs you can consider beyond traditional CDs:
- Bump-up CD: This type of CD allows you to request a higher interest rate if your bank's rates go up during the account's term. However, you're usually allowed to "bump up" your rate just once.
- No-penalty CD: Also known as a liquid CD, this type of CD allows you to withdraw funds before maturity without penalty.
- Jumbo CD: These CDs require a higher minimum deposit (usually $100,000 or more), and often offer a higher interest rate in return. In today's CD rate environment, however, the difference between traditional and jumbo CD rates may not be much.
- Brokered CD: As the name suggests, these CDs are purchased through a brokerage rather than directly from a bank. Brokered CDs can sometimes offer higher rates or more flexible terms, but they also carry more risk and might not be FDIC-insured.