Silver (SI=F) December futures opened at $64.18 per ounce on Wednesday, September 16, 2026, up 0.5% from Tuesday's closing price. Silver prices rose this morning, reaching $65.08 as of 6:42 a.m. ET.
This morning, silver prices have lifted out of the $63 to $64 range they maintained all week ahead of one of the most anticipated Fed meetings in some time. Market observers are anticipating the first Fed rate increase in three years.
According to the CME Group's FedWatch tool, there is still a 92.5% chance the Fed will raise the target range for the fed funds rate by 25 basis points, the same as yesterday. On Monday, the chances were pegged at 86.5%. On Friday, the percentage was 69.4%.
Higher interest rates are a headwind for precious metals and crypto prices since these investments do not pay interest.
Fed meeting live updates: Anticipation builds with Fed expected to hike interest rates for first time in 3 years
Current price of silver
The opening price of silver futures on Wednesday, September 16, 2026, was 0.5% higher compared to Tuesday's closing price. Here's how today's opening silver price has changed versus last week, month, and year:
- One week ago: -3.2%
- One month ago: -1.2%
- One year ago: +51.1%
For context, silver's year-over-year growth was 173.3% on May 14.
24/7 silver price tracking: Don't forget you can monitor the current price of silver on Yahoo Finance 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Want to learn more about the current top-performing companies in the silver industry? Explore a list of the top-performing companies in the silver industry using the Yahoo Finance Screener. You can create your own screeners with over 150 different screening criteria.
Silver vs. gold: Which made investors more money over the years?
Over the past 50 years, gold outperformed silver, delivering higher long-term returns. Since the 1970s, silver and gold prices have dramatically increased, but their roles in the economy and their long-term performance are very different.
Governments and investors view gold as a store of value, and central banks hold large gold reserves to protect their economies against global inflation or geopolitical crises. It's also widely used to produce jewelry.
Silver is much more abundant in supply than gold, but it also has more uses. Silver plays a significant role in manufacturing and industrial production; companies use silver to make solar panels, electronics, and medical devices. The industrial demand can affect silver's prices, causing more drastic changes.
Price of silver chart
Whether you're tracking the price of silver since last month or last year, the price-of-silver chart below shows the precious metal's value journey so far this year.
More silver coverage from the Yahoo Finance team: