When I walk into a restaurant or store, I don't want a canned greeting. Having workers yell "welcome to Moe's," or watching Texas Roadhouse waiters have to stop waiting on people to do a line dance makes me want to leave.
I like Jordan, the drive-through guy at my Starbucks, who does funny voices, but also actually has a real human interaction with me. I don't, however, need him to write a message on my cup because it's a corporate rule.
These forced sayings, routines, and interactions aim to boost brand consistency and create a distinctive and memorable experience, but that's not always a positive.
"When they create scripts they're essentially trying to mandate behavior - but it backfires more often than it doesn't," Experience Investigators CEO Jeannie Walters told Restaurant Dive. "It's pretty obvious when somebody is not talking like a human would talk."
It's easy to understand why chains want friendly workers and shareable moments, but there's a better way to make them happen, and Trader Joe's may have found a better way.
Trader Joe's doesn't have to fake it
Retailers spend millions each year training associates on customer interactions because repeat shoppers are heavily influenced by service quality.
Many chains try to force their workers to be happy, or at least act like they're happy, while Trader Joe's workers seem to genuinely enjoy their jobs. The grocery store chain topped Forbes' annual list of best employers in 2025.
Unlike Target's new structured greeting policy, which mandates that its frontline workers interact with customers, Trader Joe's has created working conditions where it happens naturally.
"Trader Joe's hires people who are comfortable talking to customers. They hire people who are naturally warm," Walters said.
When employees are naturally friendly and people-oriented, brands don't need to give them scripts or routines. Instead, brands should provide their staff with guidance about the type of experience they need to deliver, she noted.
More Retail:
- Coca-Cola quietly hints at reinventing previously failed flavor
- Bath & Body Works quietly gains a competitive advantage
- Dollar General brings back old prices
"You've got to give them the principle, and then let them have some freedom in terms of how they express that," CX Accelerator Executive Director Nate Brown told Restaurant Dive.
That creates natural interaction, something Target's new policy might struggle to do.
Here's how Target's policy works
Target recently implemented a new 10-4 program, as USA Today reported.