Bitcoin (BTC-USD) opened at $76,806.19 on Monday, September 14, 2026, 0.6% lower than Sunday's opening price. As of 7:31 a.m. ET this morning, the price of bitcoin moved up to $77,873.33.
Ethereum (ETH-USD) opened at $2,475.82 on Monday, September 14, 2026, down 2% from Sunday's opening price. The price of ethereum moved higher this morning to $2,514.09 as of 7:31 a.m. ET.
Bitcoin and ethereum prices opened lower this morning, as they did on Friday, but have moved up in early trading, despite oil prices moving even higher today following reports of attacks in the Middle East over the weekend.
An attack on a Saudi Arabian pipeline, as well as on homes and a mosque, has global oil prices (BZ=F) up over 11% in the last five-day period. Expectations that the Fed will raise rates this week have also risen appreciably. This morning, according to the CME Group's FedWatch tool, the chances for a rate increase this week are now 86.5%, up from 69.4% on Friday morning.
Higher rates will put at least a temporary lid on crypto-price growth.
Keep reading: Why a Fed rate cut isn't a done deal
Current price of bitcoin and ethereum
Bitcoin
The price of bitcoin this morning was 0.6% lower than Sunday's opening price. Here's a look at how the opening bitcoin price has changed versus last week, month, and year:
- One week ago: -4.4%
- One month ago: +21.1%
- One year ago: -33.8%
The all-time high for bitcoin was $126,198.07 on Oct. 6, 2025. The all-time low value for bitcoin was $0.04865 on July 14, 2010.
Ethereum
The price of ethereum this morning was 2% lower than Sunday's open. Here's a look at how the opening ethereum price has changed versus last week, month, and year:
- One week ago: -1.5%
- One month ago: +31.4%
- One year ago: -47%
The all-time high for ethereum was $4,953.73 on Aug. 24, 2025. The all-time low value for ethereum was $0.4209 on Oct. 21, 2015.
Bitcoin, ethereum, and other cryptocurrencies are rapidly evolving. Follow the latest developments from Yahoo Finance and others here.
How Bitcoin works
Bitcoin is a type of cryptocurrency, which is a currency that exists only in digital form and operates without government or banking oversight. By comparison, the U.S. dollar, the EU euro, the Canadian dollar, and other national currencies have paper versions and are issued by their respective governments.
Bitcoin relies on a public digital ledger that validates and records transactions and verifies bitcoin ownership. This ledger is called the blockchain, and it is globally distributed - that is, decentralized - across a broad, worldwide network of servers.
Decentralization is a fundamental aspect of cryptocurrencies. Decentralization facilitates peer-to-peer payments with no banking intermediary, enhanced security, and defense against manipulation attempts.
Learn more: What is Bitcoin, and how does it work?
How to buy Bitcoin in 2026
There are several ways to buy Bitcoin. You can go through a crypto exchange, a fintech app, or a traditional brokerage that will allow you to buy into a bitcoin ETF.
Before placing a trade, though, decide what you actually want: full ownership of your bitcoin and private keys - or easy price exposure inside a familiar, regulated system.
Whichever avenue you take, it's important to remember that bitcoin remains a high-risk, highly volatile asset compared to many other investments. Prices can surge or drop quickly, sometimes without warning. If you're considering buying bitcoin, assume volatility is part of the deal.
Learn more: Is bitcoin's price volatility an investing opportunity? Here's how to buy bitcoin.
Bitcoin and ethereum price charts
Whether you're brand new to tracking the value of bitcoin and ethereum or a more seasoned crypto investor, Yahoo Finance's price-of-bitcoin chart and price-of-ethereum chart below show a visual history of how the currencies' value continues to move and evolve.
More on crypto from the Yahoo Finance team: