Concerned about an AI bubble? Sign up for The Daily Upside for smart and actionable market news, built for investors.
It's still better to give than receive, even though giving to charities has grown more complicated lately.
Some big new rules set by the One Big Beautiful Bill Act officially kicked in this year, including a charitable deduction floor for itemizers and reduced benefits for high-income donors. The policy changes are just one reason why advisors are fielding more questions than ever about the best way to structure gifts as part of the overall estate planning strategy, especially about donor-advised funds, thanks to their "give now, decide later" flexibility that lets clients move assets off the balance sheet without having to immediately deploy them to a charity. That interest has helped DAF assets grow to top $328 billion, according to IRS data, and all signs are that giving via DAFs will accelerate further as knowledge of the vehicle grows among advisors and clients alike.
"Advisors who want to work with high-net-worth, and definitely ultra-high-net-worth, clients need to have competency in philanthropic planning," said Paul Caspersen, a program director at the American College of Financial Services. "Donor-advised funds are an important tool in the estate planning context, but they also involve highly complex planning considerations."
READ ALSO: Trump Accounts Hit 7M Enrollees, Raising New Questions for Advisors and Bipartisan Proposal Would Lift Social Security Tax Wage Cap
A Tool for the Moment
Under the One Big Beautiful Bill Act, itemizers can only deduct charitable contributions that exceed 0.5% of their adjusted gross income, effectively making smaller, ad-hoc annual gifts less tax-efficient. Because of this floor, clients may want to consider consolidating multiple years of planned charitable contributions into a single large gift that helps clear the floor and maximizes tax savings.
The DAF vehicle is attractive in this environment because bunching doesn't mean clients have to stop supporting their favorite charities annually, Caspersen explained. Instead, bunching qualifies the taxpayer for an immediate tax deduction in the year of their contribution, and they can then recommend grants to qualified nonprofits over time.
While most will find DAFs helpful in the estate planning process for charitably minded clients, it's critical for advisors to know (and follow) the law when funding them, Caspersen warned. Some considerations include: