Dividend tech stocks are a rare breed. I mean, technically NVIDIA (NASDAQ: NVDA) and Apple (NASDAQ: AAPL) pay dividends, but the yields barely reach 1%. That's why finding a decent tech company that pays reasonable yields while offering ample room for capital growth is like finding a golden needle in a haystack.
And a few short years ago, Intel (NASDAQ: INTC) fit that description to a T. The company paid yields that averaged around 2% for more than three decades and increased payouts for eight straight years. Even better, it was at the very top of the semiconductor industry. In fact, back then, AMD (NASDAQ: AMD) and NVIDIA - yes, that NVIDIA - were playing catch-up to Intel for decades.
More News from Barchart
- Dear Analog Devices Stock Fans, Mark Your Calendars for August 19
- Tired of missing midday reversals? The FREE Barchart Brief newsletter keeps you in the know. Sign up now!
But now, that's all in the past as a series of unfortunate events cast doubt on the company's future.
After pouring money into its foundry business, losing market share to AMD, watching NVIDIA dominate the AI revolution, and ultimately cutting its dividend altogether in 2024, Intel went from being the undisputed king of semiconductors and a tech dividend darling to one of Wall Street's biggest disappointments.
But now, things are looking up. Foundry is starting to contribute, the company is clawing its way back into generating meaningful revenue, and Wall Street is warming up to Intel's potential turnaround story.
So that begs the question: Can Intel reclaim its glory days from the past? Does its current trajectory open up the possibility of paying dividends again?
Let's pop the hood and have a look.
Intel's 2026 So Far: Record AI Growth, Estimate Beats, and a Turnaround Taking Shape
So far, Intel seems to be on a genuine path to a comeback. The stock's up 170% year-to-date and 389% in the last 52 weeks.
Meanwhile, Q2 FY'26's reported earnings reached $0.30 per share. That is a full 200% above Wall Street's expectations.
Revenue also grew 25% year over year to $16.1 billion - the company's strongest quarterly growth in more than 15 years.
But the headline numbers hide even better news. Its Data Center and AI segment grew 59%, while Foundry grew 31%. Both of these numbers are hinting at the same thing: Intel's AI and Foundry bet is starting to pay off. Better late than never.
In other news, management highlighted improved factory yields and faster cycle times, progress toward risk production on the 18A-P node, and a plan for high-volume 14A manufacturing by 2028. It also doesn't hurt that the company's deepening its ties with Alphabet via a strategic partnership through Google Cloud.