Silver (SI=F) December futures opened at $63.76 per ounce on Tuesday, September 15, 2026, down 0.6% from Monday's closing price. Silver prices are edging lower this morning, hitting $63.60 as of 7:15 a.m. ET.
Silver prices are losing traction this morning as the Fed is set to begin its two-day rate-setting meeting later today. Expectations now overwhelmingly point to the Fed announcing higher rates after the committee concludes its meeting tomorrow afternoon.
According to the CME Group's FedWatch tool, there's now a 92.5% chance the Fed will raise rates after tomorrow's two-day meeting. Yesterday, the Fed had an 86.5% chance of raising rates. On Friday, the percentage was 69.4%.
Learn more: How a Fed rate hike affects your money
Current price of silver
The opening price of silver futures on Tuesday, September 15, 2026, was 0.6% lower compared to Monday's closing price. Here's how today's opening silver price has changed versus last week, month, and year:
- One week ago: -3.4%
- One month ago: -1.9%
- One year ago: +51.1%
For context, silver's year-over-year growth was 173.3% on May 14.
24/7 silver price tracking: Don't forget you can monitor the current price of silver on Yahoo Finance 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Want to learn more about the current top-performing companies in the silver industry? Explore a list of the top-performing companies in the silver industry using the Yahoo Finance Screener. You can create your own screeners with over 150 different screening criteria.
Silver price predictions for the next decade
Silver price forecasts vary wildly by expert. Some say silver's price will hold steady or experience modest growth, while others predict huge price spikes. Here are some of the biggest predictions for silver's price:
1. Silver reaches $100 per ounce
Experts with BlackRock and J.P. Morgan agree that the outlook for silver remains strong, and its price will increase. By the end of 2026, experts predict silver's price will surpass $80 per ounce, and it could reach $100 per ounce by 2030.
Does that mean you should buy lots of silver? Be aware that predictions can change, and they may revise their forecasts at any time.
2. Silver coins become more popular
With the conflict in the Middle East, investors are increasingly concerned about economic turmoil and manufacturing supply chain disruptions. Historically, that means investors will increasingly buy precious metals, such as silver.
Because buying an ounce of gold is prohibitively expensive for new investors, silver coins or bars are a more accessible entry point, so there may be increased demand.
3. Pricing may be more volatile
Compared to gold, silver's price tends to be more volatile, with more rises and falls. Its price fluctuates due to changes in industrial demand and investor confidence.
For example, at the beginning of January 2026, silver's price topped $113 per ounce. But by February, its price dropped to $77 per ounce, a decrease of about 32% in just a few weeks.
Keep reading: Silver price predictions for the next decade: What should investors expect?
Price of silver chart
Whether you're tracking the price of silver since last month or last year, the price-of-silver chart below shows the precious metal's value journey so far this year.
More silver coverage from the Yahoo Finance team: