While markets data shows that the global market for dining out is projected to grow from $1.9 trillion now to more than $3 trillion by 2030, many individual chains that were popular in another era are struggling to survive amid changing consumer trends.
U.S. chains like Smokey Bones, Peet's Coffee, and Joe's Crab Shack have collectively closed dozens of locations this year. Meanwhile, over in the United Kingdom, Leon and The Real Greek both nearly halved their store locations in 2026 despite once going through a period of rapid expansion that made them well-recognized chains in the country's major cities.
With the first location opening in the Greater London borough of Enfield in 1974, the restaurant chain Beefeater has, over several generations, earned a reputation for being a family-friendly steakhouse chain serving grilled steak cuts, burgers, and fish and chips at more accessible prices.
Beefeater to shut 106 restaurant locations across the UK
At its peak, the chain had approximately 140 standalone and Brewers Fayre brewery-attached locations in the United Kingdom and Ireland. But amid soaring operating costs the hotel and dining company Whitbread confirmed plans to shutter all remaining 106 restaurants by September.
Earlier in the year, Whitbread announced a restructuring plan that aims to bring down annual costs down costs by £250 million ($333 million USD).
The company's largest holding is the hotel chain Premier Inn. The current strategy is to convert some locations into hotel rooms and others into integrated unbranded hotel restaurants. Still other locations will be sold for what the company estimates will free up £1.5 billion ($2 billion USD).
"As you may have seen, we have recently announced changes to our business, which is resulting in the closure of our Branded Restaurants," Whitbread said in a statement on the location closures. "This means that on Thursday 10 September 2026 your local Beefeater and all other UK Beefeaters will close."
For customers who collected points through repeated visits, the Beefeater loyalty scheme will be shut down by Aug. 31.
'We recognize the impact of this proposal on colleagues who work at the affected sites': Whitehead on Beefeater closures
Approximately 3,800 employees have been registered as working for Beefeater as of 2026. While Whitbread said that some of these workers will be able to transfer to jobs with the hospitality portfolio and new hotel restaurants, it also acknowledged that the extensive closures will result in significant job losses.