Choosing the right dividend stocks is not just about high yield but about choosing companies that pay consistent dividends even when the business hits a rough patch. That is why Chevron (CVX), Realty Income (O), and NextEra Energy (NEE) stand out heading into September. They operate in different industries but each company offers reliable and consistent dividends while still leaving room for earnings and cash flow to grow. All three have also earned status as "Dividend Aristocrats," having increased their dividends for more than 25 years in a row.
Dividend Stock #1: Chevron (CVX)
Chevron has the most cyclical business among the three dividend stocks on this list. Chevron is an energy company that explores, produces, transports, refines, and sells oil and natural gas. Its earnings ultimately depend heavily on oil and gas prices. Still, the company has built a remarkable record of consistent dividend increases for 39 years.
More News from Barchart
- This High-Yield Dividend Stock Is up 60% From Its 2026 Lows. Why You Should Think About Selling Now.
- Plains All American Stock Is a Top Pick for Growth and Income
- Get exclusive insights with the FREE Barchart Brief newsletter. Subscribe now for quick, incisive midday market analysis you won't find anywhere else.
Currently, Chevron pays a quarterly dividend of $1.78 per share, or $7.12 annually, which results in a forward dividend yield of 3.5%. Chevron's consistent performance also supports its dividend payout ratio of 65.1%.
In the second quarter, the company generated $12 billion in adjusted net income. The Hess acquisition, in particular, is allowing the company to get more production from a larger asset base while also extracting synergies from the deal.
Chevron also generated $19.7 billion from cash from operations and $15.4 billion in free cash flow. This financial flexibility allowed it to reduce total debt by $8.4 billion as well as pay $3.5 billion in dividends and repurchase shares worth $3.1 billion.
Being exposed to commodity prices, CVX stock may not be the safest income stock, but it is an interesting choice for those who want income plus meaningful exposure to the energy sector. On Wall Street, Chevron stock has a consensus "Moderate Buy" rating. Of the 26 analysts covering the stock, 17 have a "Strong Buy" rating, three have a "Moderate Buy," five have a "Hold" rating, and one analyst has a "Strong Sell" rating.
Dividend Stock #2: Realty Income (O)
The second dividend stock on my list is a pure-play income stock, which is otherwise known as the "Monthly Dividend Company." Realty Income is a real estate investment trust (REIT) that owns commercial properties and collects rent from tenants. It holds more than 15,500 properties across the United States, the United Kingdom, and eight countries in Europe. As a REIT, it is legally required to distribute a substantial portion of its cash flow to shareholders, and unlike most companies, Realty Income pays dividends monthly.