Silver (SI=F) December futures opened at $66.44 per ounce on Wednesday, September 9, 2026, down 0.8% from Tuesday's closing price. Silver prices rose slightly this morning, reaching $66.94 as of 6:48 a.m. ET.
Just like last week at this time, precious metal prices are struggling to hold onto recent gains as military actions between the U.S. and Iran ramp up across the Middle East.
The timing couldn't be worse.
Just one week from now, the Fed will close out its two-day meeting, where many expect the committee to raise interest rates to battle rising costs, particularly energy costs driven by the war with Iran.
Should the Fed raise rates next week, silver prices will likely moderate further since precious metals do not pay interest.
Keep reading: Oil Prices Hit $100 as U.S. Destroys Five Iranian Tankers
Current price of silver
The opening price of silver futures on Wednesday, September 9, 2026, was 0.8% lower compared to Tuesday's closing price. Here's how today's opening silver price has changed versus last week, month, and year:
- One week ago: +4.9%
- One month ago: +4.4%
- One year ago: +59.8%
For context, silver's year-over-year growth was 173.3% on May 14.
24/7 silver price tracking: Don't forget you can monitor the current price of silver on Yahoo Finance 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Want to learn more about the current top-performing companies in the silver industry? Explore a list of the top-performing companies in the silver industry using the Yahoo Finance Screener. You can create your own screeners with over 150 different screening criteria.
Silver vs. gold: Which made investors more money over the years?
Over the past 50 years, gold outperformed silver, delivering higher long-term returns. Since the 1970s, silver and gold prices have dramatically increased, but their roles in the economy and their long-term performance are very different.
Governments and investors view gold as a store of value, and central banks hold large gold reserves to protect their economies against global inflation or geopolitical crises. It's also widely used to produce jewelry.
Silver is much more abundant in supply than gold, but it also has more uses. Silver plays a significant role in manufacturing and industrial production; companies use silver to make solar panels, electronics, and medical devices. The industrial demand can affect silver's prices, causing more drastic changes.
Price of silver chart
Whether you're tracking the price of silver since last month or last year, the price-of-silver chart below shows the precious metal's value journey so far this year.
More silver coverage from the Yahoo Finance team: