Silver (SI=F) December futures opened at $64.69 per ounce on Wednesday, September 2, 2026, down 1.0% from Tuesday's closing price. The silver price fell further this morning, reaching $64.24 as of 6:48 a.m. ET.
The U.S. military launched its second wave of attacks against Iran in a three-day span, prompting retaliation from the Iranian military against U.S. military bases in the Middle East. This reescalation marks a significant shift from the economic-pressure approach the U.S. was taking against Iran in order to force a peace deal and reopen the Strait of Hormuz.
As a result of the renewed fighting, silver prices opened at its lowest levels in two weeks, and silver prices are sliding further in early trading.
If the fighting persists and energy prices continue to rise (Brent Crude (BZ=F) is back to near $95 a barrel), the Fed may have no choice but to raise rates later this month, putting even more downward pressure on silver prices.
Current price of silver
The opening price of silver futures on Wednesday, September 2, 2026, was 1.0% lower compared to Tuesday's closing price. Here's how today's opening silver price has changed versus last week, month, and year:
- One week ago: -6.7%
- One month ago: +9.3%
- One year ago: +61%
For context, silver's year-over-year growth was 173.3% on May 14.
24/7 silver price tracking: Don't forget you can monitor the current price of silver on Yahoo Finance 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Want to learn more about the current top-performing companies in the silver industry? Explore a list of the top-performing companies in the silver industry using the Yahoo Finance Screener. You can create your own screeners with over 150 different screening criteria.
Silver vs. gold: Which made investors more money over the years?
Over the past 50 years, gold outperformed silver, delivering higher long-term returns. Since the 1970s, silver and gold prices have dramatically increased, but their roles in the economy and their long-term performance are very different.
Governments and investors view gold as a store of value, and central banks hold large gold reserves to protect their economies against global inflation or geopolitical crises. It's also widely used to produce jewelry.
Silver is much more abundant in supply than gold, but it also has more uses. Silver plays a significant role in manufacturing and industrial production; companies use silver to make solar panels, electronics, and medical devices. The industrial demand can affect silver's prices, causing more drastic changes.
Price of silver chart
Whether you're tracking the price of silver since last month or last year, the price-of-silver chart below shows the precious metal's value journey so far this year.
More silver coverage from the Yahoo Finance team: