The effects of Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent's extraordinary intervention in the bond market faded quickly on Thursday.
One day after Bessent announced that the Treasury Department would at least double its planned buybacks of longer-dated U.S. debt - a move aimed at adding liquidity to a "thin" summer market and tamping down rising government borrowing costs - bond investors essentially shrugged off the surprise, driving yields higher once again.
Yields have been rising on a combination of concerns, including elevated inflation, higher oil prices due to the war in Iran, a torrent of debt issuance from tech companies angling to lead the AI revolution, a U.S. budget deficit on pace to top $2 trillion for fiscal year 2026 and a national debt that just crossed $40 trillion.
After long bond yields rose to 19-year highs, Bessent on Wednesday announced the increase in repurchases, his latest effort to bring down long-term rates and have the Treasury lean more heavily on shorter-term borrowing.
The unusual move worked - but only briefly. After dropping on Wednesday, the yields on 10-year and 30-year Treasury bonds rose again today, though they edged off their intraday highs.
Bessent told CNBC Thursday morning that the Treasury Department's debt buybacks could be even larger than the $4 billion he had announced, and he insisted that he has a "big toolkit" to drive yields lower. "We believe that the yields don't reflect the underlying fundamentals," Bessent said.
The potential for larger buybacks did little to calm bond market fears, as analysts and investors expressed skepticism that Treasury's intervention will address the root of the concern.
"This is not the cure to what ails the bond market. There are structural forces here at play that are really beyond the Treasury and the administration's control," Adam Phillips, managing director of investments at EP Wealth Advisors, told CNBC. "You're going to need to come at it with a little bit more force if it's going to have staying power."
John Fath, a managing partner at BTG Pactual Asset Management, told Bloomberg that the market might not be getting the message that Bessent wants. "They have reserved the right to increase the buyback, but I guess at some point, the markets might view that as desperation," Fath said. "The bottom line is that deficits are not going away."
Touting a new fiscal plan: In his interview with CNBC, Bessent tried to address the deficit issue, promising that a new plan to address fiscal concerns would be announced within days.