By Leika Kihara, Makiko Yamazaki and Tamiyuki Kihara
TOKYO, Aug 3 (Reuters) - A joint U.S.-Japanese effort to fight off speculative bets against a battered yen last week followed months of preparation by the two nations and a rare and public alignment of interests in Washington and Tokyo over exchange rates.
While unilateral efforts by Japanese authorities to stop sharp yen selling in the past have failed to provide a firm floor for the currency, U.S. Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent's verbal support for a stronger yen has given bureaucrats in Tokyo a new tool in their fight this year.
For Japan, a weak yen has fanned import prices, creating cost-of-living headaches for successive governments, including current Prime Minister Sanae Takaichi's.
For the U.S., a weak yen blunts the trade advantage from President Donald Trump's flagship tariffs while a related sell-off in Japanese government bonds could spill over to U.S. Treasury yields.
The shared currency anxiety has forged increasingly cosy bilateral conversations about exchange rates, historically a diplomatically thorny topic for the two economic powers, but also added new pressure for the Bank of Japan to persist with rate hikes.
U.S. participation in yen-buying intervention was considered as early as January, when the New York Federal Reserve made rare rate checks to help Tokyo combat yen declines, said a Japanese government official with knowledge of the preparations.
"Including online meetings, we've held talks about 10 times for discussions that included exchange rates," Japanese Finance Minister Satsuki Katayama said on Monday on how frequently she spoke with Bessent.
"When he visited Japan in May, we talked three-and-a-half hours including over dinner," Katayama said upon announcing Japan's joint currency intervention with the United States.
The May talks followed Japan's huge yen-buying intervention between late April and early May, which failed to reverse the yen's downtrend.
In a sign negotiations were intensifying, Katayama said after the May meeting the two have been "coordinating very closely on foreign exchange and will continue to do so."
Bessent, too, said Japan's fundamentals are "strong and resilient, and that will be reflected in the exchange rate."
He also repeated his calls for faster BOJ interest rate increases, signalling Washington's concern its slow pace of hikes could leave the central bank behind the curve in addressing inflation.
A month later, the BOJ raised interest rates to a 31-year high of 1% in a landmark step in policy normalisation. But with Japan's real borrowing costs deeply negative, the move failed to give a lasting boost to the sagging currency.