The dollar index (DXY00) fell by -0.17% on Wednesday. The dollar fell on Wednesday after the S&P 500 climbed to a new record high, reducing demand for dollar liquidity. Also, Wednesday's weaker-than-expected reports on July ADP employment and July ISM services were bearish for the dollar. Losses in the dollar are limited on hawkish comments from Kansas City Fed President Jeff Schmid and Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari, who said tighter Fed policy was needed to reduce inflation.
The US July ADP employment change rose by +44,000, weaker than expectations of +65,000.
More News from Barchart
- Dollar Pressured by Strength in Stocks and Lower Crude Prices
- Strength in Stocks and Lower Crude Prices Weigh on the Dollar
- Dollar Slides on Stock Strength and Weakness in US Economic Reports
- Tired of missing midday reversals? The FREE Barchart Brief newsletter keeps you in the know. Sign up now!
The US July ISM services index rose +0.1 to 54.1, weaker than expectations of 54.5. The July ISM services price paid sub-index unexpectedly rose +2.6 to 70.3, stronger than expectations of a decline to 65.0.
Tuesday evening, Kansas City Fed President Jeff Schmid said, "Given the strength of demand and investment, I do not see the current stance of monetary policy as restrictive. As such, I believe that bringing inflation down to the Fed's 2% objective will require tighter policy."
Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari said that the Fed should start to raise interest rates incrementally right now to curb inflation that remains too high.
The markets are discounting a 54% probability of a +25 bp rate hike at the next FOMC meeting on September 15-16.
EUR/USD (^EURUSD) rose by +0.16% on Wednesday. The euro moved higher on Wednesday amid a weak dollar. The euro also gained support from Wednesday's report showing the Eurozone July S&P composite PMI was revised higher. Gains in the euro were limited after the Eurozone June PPI eased as expected, a dovish factor for ECB policy.
The Eurozone July S&P composite PMI was revised upward by +0.1 to 52.0 from the previously reported 51.9.
Eurozone June PPI eased to 4.6% y/y from 5.9% y/y in May, right on expectations.
The markets are discounting an 81% chance of a +25 bp ECB rate hike at its next policy meeting on September 10.
USD/JPY (^USDJPY) fell by -0.02% on Wednesday. The yen found modest support on Wednesday from the hawkish minutes of the BOJ's June 15-16 policy meeting, where most board members saw upside risks to underlying inflation and that the BOJ should aim to keep raising the benchmark rate if the economy and prices meet its outlook. The yen also has carryover support from Tuesday when US Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent signaled the US will continue joint intervention in the forex market in support of the yen, saying, "We will do whatever it takes" to support Japan. Gains in the yen are limited after the Japan July S&P services PMI was revised downward.