Silver (SI=F) December futures opened at $66.51 per ounce on Tuesday, September 22, 2026, up 0.2% from Monday's closing price. Silver prices are edging lower this morning after hitting a high of $67.32 in early trading. That is the highest silver price we have observed since September 9.
Silver prices are largely driven by industrial demand for some of the global economy's most important items, including AI hardware and solar panels. That makes this week's scheduled talks between President Trump and Chinese leader Xi Jinping critical to the precious metal's near-term outlook:
Everything from tariffs to artificial intelligence controls is expected to be up for discussion. Looming over the meeting are Chinese export curbs on critical minerals and rare earths that have caused supply shocks for US and other global companies.
Keep reading: Trump-Xi Showdown Casts a Shadow Over the Global Economy
Current price of silver
The opening price of silver futures on Tuesday, September 22, 2026, was 0.2% higher compared to Monday's closing price. Here's how today's opening silver price has changed versus last week, month, and year:
- One week ago: +5.5%
- One month ago: -2.3%
- One year ago: +52.3%
For context, silver's year-over-year growth was 173.3% on May 14.
24/7 silver price tracking: Don't forget you can monitor the current price of silver on Yahoo Finance 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Want to learn more about the current top-performing companies in the silver industry? Explore a list of the top-performing companies in the silver industry using the Yahoo Finance Screener. You can create your own screeners with over 150 different screening criteria.
Silver price predictions for the next decade
Silver price forecasts vary wildly by expert. Some say silver's price will hold steady or experience modest growth, while others predict huge price spikes. Here are some of the biggest predictions for silver's price:
1. Silver reaches $100 per ounce
Experts with BlackRock and J.P. Morgan agree that the outlook for silver remains strong, and its price will increase. By the end of 2026, experts predict silver's price will surpass $80 per ounce, and it could reach $100 per ounce by 2030.
Does that mean you should buy lots of silver? Be aware that predictions can change, and they may revise their forecasts at any time.
2. Silver coins become more popular
With the conflict in the Middle East, investors are increasingly concerned about economic turmoil and manufacturing supply chain disruptions. Historically, that means investors will increasingly buy precious metals, such as silver.
Because buying an ounce of gold is prohibitively expensive for new investors, silver coins or bars are a more accessible entry point, so there may be increased demand.
3. Pricing may be more volatile
Compared to gold, silver's price tends to be more volatile, with more rises and falls. Its price fluctuates due to changes in industrial demand and investor confidence.
For example, at the beginning of January 2026, silver's price topped $113 per ounce. But by February, its price dropped to $77 per ounce, a decrease of about 32% in just a few weeks.
Keep reading: Silver price predictions for the next decade: What should investors expect?
Price of silver chart
Whether you're tracking the price of silver since last month or last year, the price-of-silver chart below shows the precious metal's value journey so far this year.
More silver coverage from the Yahoo Finance team: