Stock market today: Dow, S&P 500, Nasdaq futures rise as Nvidia, Salesforce earnings boost tech
US stock futures climbed on Thursday after earnings from Nvidia (NVDA), Salesforce (CRM), and CrowdStrike (CRWD) lifted the tech trade and investors awaited the Fed's Jackson Hole gathering.
Futures on the Dow Jones Industrial Average (YM=F) advanced 0.2%, while those on the S&P 500 (ES=F) added 0.5%. Contracts for the Nasdaq-100 (NQ=F) gained 1%, building on Wednesday's gains.
Nvidia stock rose 6% in premarket trading on Thursday as the company reported an earnings beat and signaled that it sees strong AI demand throughout next year, easing concerns that the AI chip king wouldn't be able to sustain its torrid pace of growth.
On Wednesday night, the Information reported that Nvidia agreed to buy Hugging Face, an open-source model repository, for $12.9 billion. The reported move comes after Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang touted the company's ballooning AI investments, saying, "the only regret that I have is that I didn't invest more and sooner" in AI labs.
With the AI bellwether's report in the rearview mirror, the focus now turns to the Federal Reserve's Jackson Hole Symposium, where central bank officials will debate the path of interest rate policy. Fed Chairman Kevin Warsh is expected to deliver a speech on Friday, though his message is anyone's guess.
Bond yields have stabilized after spiking last week as investors continue to weigh Treasury's intervention in the bond market and the likelihood that the Fed would hold rates steady. On the economic front, data on jobless claims, released Thursday, will add to the picture of the labor market.
Investors will also get a glimpse of whether consumers are financially stressed via earnings reports from Dollar General (DG) and Dollar Tree (DLTR). Discount retailers have attracted higher-income shoppers in recent quarters by offering a variety of price points, and the earnings calls could offer insight into any shifts in the K-shaped economy.