The Federal Reserve's new, less predictable approach to monetary policy kept Wall Street guessing until Wednesday's announcement: no rate hike (yet).
Fed Chairman Kevin Warsh, who favors a Federal Open Market Committee that limits providing any hints about interest rate decisions, kept the market in suspense until the official announcement of another rate pause. The Fed held rates steady, but three officials voted for a rate increase.
Follow live: Fed holds interest rates steady in split decision
Wall Street traders, as measured by federal funds futures, increasingly expect a rate hike in September.
"The cool June CPI print was a step in the right direction, but higher energy prices mean that we should see that reversed in the July readings," Collin Martin, head of fixed income research and strategy at Schwab, said in an analysis Monday.
Martin expects the Fed will wait until they see more evidence that inflation is heating up before announcing an interest rate increase.
What will a rate environment leaning toward an interest rate increase mean for your money? The federal funds rate influences savings rates, interest charges, and, to a small degree, mortgage rates. Here's how to prepare for the impact on your deposits, credit, and debt.
How a Fed rate hike affects deposit accounts
An eventual series of Fed rate hikes will likely slowly lift deposit earnings. However, deposit accounts are mostly for convenience, not substantial returns. So far in 2026, the gains have been anything but substantial.
Checking accounts
Your checking account churns cash flow to pay bills. The liquidity limits your earning power.
The national average interest rate on checking accounts has barely budged this year, remaining at 0.07%. A Fed short-term interest rate increase, whenever it comes, may nudge earnings incrementally higher.
Savings accounts
Interest rates on savings accounts are only marginally better, clinging to 0.38%. But savings accounts are for near-term money.
High-yield savings accounts have been more effective at paying interest. Rates are mostly in the 3% range, with an occasional 4% yield available.
Dig deeper: 10 best high-yield savings accounts
Money market accounts
If you have $10,000 or more that you want to keep on the sidelines but easy to tap when you need it, money market accounts have been convenient - but low-paying. National average payouts are up slightly to 0.65%.
A better option might be a high-yield money market account, where you may still find something just under 4%.
What a rate hike does to CDs
CD rates have begun inching higher. The national average on a 12-month CD is 1.68%, but you can find better deals if you're willing to shop around - and move your money to the best offer.
Your minimum deposit and term will affect your rate. Fed rate hikes will ultimately sweeten CD rates.
Learn more: The best CD rates on the market
What a rate hike will mean for mortgages and personal loans
Home mortgages
And then there are mortgage rates, often the largest borrowing expense consumers face. Fed interest rate increases don't usually impact mortgage rates - the hikes are often priced in by the bond market before monetary policy moves.
At the end of February and into early March, mortgage rates were hitting three-year lows. Then the war in the Middle East began, and rather than falling further, home loan rates reversed course and edged higher. Home loan rates have topped the mid-6% range, mirroring the higher yields of the 10-year Treasury note.
Housing industry analysts at the Mortgage Bankers Association and Fannie Mae predict that mortgage rates will remain above 6% through 2027.
Dig deeper: When will mortgage rates go down?
Personal loans
Personal loan interest rates have risen slightly to an average of 11.86%. Advertised personal loan rates are now mostly in the 7% to 8% range.
What happens to credit cards when the Fed raises interest rates
Credit card interest impacts everyone - except those who pay off their balance each month.
Credit card rates have risen from around 15% in 2021 to an average of near 21% today. Credit card rates didn't respond to last year's Fed rate cuts and a falling prime rate. With a rate hike looming, you may want to keep a watch on your credit card spending - it's likely to get more expensive.
Yahoo Finance tip: The best way to earn a lower credit card interest rate right away is to ask. If you make regular payments and have seen your credit score improving, it's a good time to call your credit card provider and ask for a lower interest rate.
How the Fed's interest rate policy impacts your investments
Stock prices often react to the Fed's rate actions, but they are only one factor among many affecting the investing climate and stock prices.
If you intend to manage your investments to suit the current environment, keep watch on broader economic and corporate profit trends, as well as interest rates. If you prefer to stay conservative, fill your portfolio with high-quality stocks that have proven themselves in all economic cycles.
Then, wait patiently for long-term growth.