One of the more spectacular returns in the global oil industry might be happening right now.
According to several media reports published after market close on Thursday, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) is in advanced discussions to invest in oil fields in Venezuela. The company exited that market in mid-2007 following a series of disputes with the government of former President Hugo Chávez, which aimed to effectively renationalize the domestic oil sector.
Missed Nvidia in 2009? This Rare Signal Is Flashing Again. In 2009, a "Double Down" signal flashed for a little-known chipmaker called Nvidia. For the first time in years, that same "Total Conviction" signal is flashing for a company 1/100th the size of Nvidia. Continue »
If it plays its cards right, the U.S. energy giant could even get its hands on the advanced project it operated all those years ago. Here's a look at how a return to the country might affect the company.
Look who's coming back... maybe
With the recent capture and arrest of former president (and Chávez protege) Nicolas Maduro and the ascension of a more U.S.-friendly administration, Venezuela is more open to foreign involvement in its oil sector.
Energy companies from outside the country's borders have already gotten involved; on Wednesday, for example, billionaire Harold Hamm's Continental Resources signed a memorandum of understanding with PDVSA, the state-run oil company, to develop one part of the country's main oil region, the Orinoco. Further afield, Italy's Eni, which already had a presence in Venezuela, signed a contract earlier this month to expand its operations. And one of the few U.S.-based oil majors that stayed despite pressure from previous administrations, Chevron (NYSE:CVX), similarly agreed to boost its operations, committing to $7 billion in investments over five years.
That's likely why news of ExxonMobil's apparent plans to return didn't trigger a significant reaction from investors -- the stock basically traded sideways in after-hours action Thursday following those media reports. If the articles are accurate, the company's move isn't all that surprising given the opportunities presented, and some might view it as being relatively slow and Johnny-come-lately.
A suite of possibilities
The sources of those reports provided differing nuggets of speculation. The Wall Street Journal, citing unnamed "people familiar with the matter," wrote that ExxonMobil was on the brink of signing a deal, specifically an MOU with PDVSA that could be finalized as soon as the end of this month. That would lay the groundwork for the company to invest in a series of developed and undeveloped fields. Collectively, these could contain the equivalent of over 50 billion barrels of oil, according to the newspaper's sources. That's quite a significant number given that the Venezuelan government says the country's total is roughly 300 billion.