Tesla (TSLA) stock fell early Thursday after the EV pioneer reported mixed second quarter results that missed Wall Street expectations. However, its cash burn rate was less than expected. Investors may be looking for more on its physical AI build-outs.
Tesla reported Q2 revenue of $28.24 after the closing bell on Wednesday, versus the $26.32 billion expected per Bloomberg consensus, up 26% from a year ago. Tesla posted adjusted earnings per share of $0.33 compared with the $0.50 estimated. Adjusted EBITDA came in at $3.2 billion, versus $4 billion expected.
Tesla stock slid by more than 7% in premarket trading on Thursday as investors weighed the earnings miss alongside the revenue beat.
Tesla said Optimus humanoid robot production remains on track for later this year. "The initial Optimus builds will be used in our Optimus Academy for training data collection and further functionality development," the company said in a statement, but Tesla did not indicate when the latest version of Optimus would be revealed.
Tesla also confirmed that its robotaxi rollout spanned seven major metro areas. "We expanded the unsupervised operation area in Austin and launched unsupervised rides in Miami, Orlando, and Tampa in July," the company said. "Preparation for expansion of our Robotaxi service to additional U.S. metros continued, including testing, permitting and first responder training."
"We'll continue to scale very rapidly with Robotaxi - more than 10% growth in miles driven per week," CEO Elon Musk said on the earnings call, acknowledging that safety considerations will limit its growth.
Full self-driving active subscriptions climbed to 1.48 million, up 56% from a year ago, Tesla said.
Tesla's free cash flow burn continued in the quarter, though it was less than expected, coming in at -$1.09 billion versus -$3.64 billion estimated. Musk added that 2026 would be a "massive capex year," and CFO Vaibhav Taneja confirmed that Tesla's capex would be "more than $25 billion" this year. Analysts expected full-year capital expenditures to hit $25.16 billion.
Tesla is spending aggressively on capital expenditures across several fronts at once: Optimus humanoid robot production, the AI data center build-out, and the Cybercab production ramp-up. Those are the bets that justify Tesla's rich valuation, but they are also consuming cash right as the auto business is improving.
Tesla and Musk's other company, SpaceX (SPCX), collaborate on certain projects like Terafab and AI initiatives, which has led to speculation the two companies may merge. When asked about it, Musk said while there was "overlap" across the two companies, "we can't talk about combining companies on an earnings call. It's got to be done with the appropriate process."