China's demand for crude oil imports and the pace of its refined products exports will help shape the trend in oil prices through the end of the year, alongside the supply disruptions in the Middle East.
Decade-low Chinese crude oil imports have eased upward pressure on oil prices in recent months despite the worst supply disruption in the history of oil markets. China's tumbling demand for crude oil imports was the key demand-side factor in capping the price hikes since the Iran war began.
The market is now increasingly wondering what China will do next and how the immediate crude import and fuel export policies of the world's top crude importer will influence regional and global oil and fuel markets.
China Helped Cushion The Supply Crisis in the First Half
Over the past four months, China has slashed its crude oil imports, reacting to the $100-plus oil price and extreme volatility in the early weeks of the war.
The weakest Chinese imports in years helped limit the price spikes as China removed about 4 million barrels per day (bpd) of import demand while supply remained constrained at the Strait of Hormuz.
China generally reduces its crude oil imports when prices top $80 per barrel and goes on a buying spree at low oil prices in the $60-70 per barrel range. Beijing is averse to high purchase prices and is always looking for a bargain.
It deployed this strategy last year when $60-70 a barrel oil allowed it to stash more than 1 billion barrels of crude stockpiles. Some analysts estimated that China faced the start of the Iran war at the end of February with as many as 1.4 billion barrels of crude oil in strategic and commercial reserves.
The huge inventory build helped China manage its crude purchases significantly lower amid spiking oil prices in March and April.
China is the world's top crude importer, but it was also the importer best prepared to weather the global supply crisis triggered by the Middle East conflict. In the year before the Iran war started, China is estimated to have amassed between 1.2 billion and 1.4 billion barrels of oil in commercial and strategic reserves. These could be even higher as the inventories are a closely guarded secret, as are China's imminent plans about stockpiling or drawing down reserves.
As a result, China has become the swing demand buyer on the global oil market since the beginning of the Middle East crisis in February.
The world's top crude importer, through very low import volumes in the past months, prevented a major spike in oil prices, as its opportunistic purchases crumbled with the price spike.