Health insurers are dropping Medicare Advantage plans - and nearly 3 million older Americans will be affected
Moneywise and Yahoo Finance LLC may earn commission or revenue through links in the content below.
Thousands of retirees are receiving notification that their Medicare Advantage plan won't be available next year, and there's nothing they can do about it except find another option.
This year alone, 1 in 10 Medicare Advantage policyholders face forced disenrollment, according to an analysis by researchers at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health (1). That's as many as 2.9 million Americans.
Must Read
- Jeff Bezos backs a platform that lets anyone invest in rental homes for as little as $100 - 6 ways to build wealth like a landlord without actually being one
- JPMorgan sees gold hitting $5,000/oz by Q4 - and savvy investors are protecting their wealth with a tax-advantaged Gold IRA. Get your free guide from Priority Gold
- The tax breaks in Trump's 'big beautiful bill' expire after 2028. Here are 4 moves to make before the window closes
In 12 states, more than 1 in 5 policyholders are losing their plan. Older Americans in Vermont will be particularly hard hit, with 92% of policyholders forced to find other options.
The first major insurer to announce its exit from multiple markets in 2027 is Humana, which is doing so for the second consecutive year. This will impact 600,000 members, Humana's CFO Celeste Mellet said during a Q2 earnings call, adding that plan exits will be used to "prioritize higher-performing plans (2)."
During the first half of 2026, Humana reported a profit of $1.9 billion.
"Humana's decision is another sign that Medicare Advantage insurers are prioritizing profit growth over enrollment growth," Shannon Benton, executive director of The Senior Citizens League, told MarketWatch (3). "We expect to hear more from the major insurers in the coming weeks."
Why Medicare Advantage plans are disappearing
Medicare Advantage (MA), which operates at the county level, is a private-plan alternative to traditional Medicare. As of 2026, more than half (55%) of eligible Medicare beneficiaries were enrolled in MA plans, according to KFF (4), while nearly a quarter (23%) of MA enrollees had a special needs plan.
Enrollment in MA plans had been growing steadily for more than two decades, attracting older Americans away from traditional Medicare with its dental, vision and hearing benefits - often with low or zero monthly premiums. But that changed in 2025.
"Multiple large insurers have now substantially reduced their Medicare Advantage offerings for 2026, citing financial pressures and policy uncertainty," the Johns Hopkins research notes (1).