During CNBC's Mad Money episode aired on August 5, Jim Cramer addressed investor concerns surrounding Space Exploration Technologies Corp. (NASDAQ:SPCX) and its immense capital requirements. Explaining why he remains bullish on SpaceX's long-term trajectory despite the massive expenditures involved, Cramer stated:
I want to take this moment to explain why the stock might be valuable years down the road. Again, with the caveat that I don't know how many years or even which road, but you know what? It doesn't matter. I'm not being facetious here. This is Elon Musk we're talking about, quite possibly the greatest business person of our time. Because of his success with Tesla, he's been able to raise all the money he needs to get the job done. So even as skeptics may blanch about the long-term viability of a company with so much mammoth ambitions that need so much cash, I want to tack the other way and say that Musk will never have trouble raising money. He easily raised $44 billion to buy the money-losing Twitter, for heaven's sake. So I bet he'll have no problem raising a couple hundred billion dollars here or maybe a few hundred billion dollars there, or possibly much more once SpaceX has a line of sight to profitability. He has that many acolytes, that many true believers, many of whom have enough money to help his cause. As long as he's there, I think this one's good to go, which is one of the reasons I like the story.
Orbital Computing and Starlink
Cramer also highlighted the Space Exploration Technologies Corp.'s (NASDAQ:SPCX) dominance in launch capacity, as he noted that its Falcon class delivers roughly 2,500 tons to orbit annually, representing 80% to 90% of Earth's total payload volume. He pointed to Musk's plans for Starship to scale capacity to millions of tons, enabling long-range initiatives like orbital data centers powered by solar energy and natural space cooling, which is an idea conceptually endorsed by NVIDIA CEO Jensen Huang.
In the near term, Cramer emphasized Starlink as the commercial engine funding these long-range projects. Operating in 167 global markets, Starlink added 1.7 million subscribers in a single quarter, with President and COO Gwynne Shotwell anticipating continued market share gains from legacy telecom carriers. Cramer compared SpaceX to a 100-year railroad bond, and framed it as a generational holding for patient investors looking past short-term lockup expirations toward multi-decade upside.