The fast-food fried chicken space has several contenders vying for the throne. Chick-fil-A has been a market leader, but Popeyes has competed with its once-viral chicken sandwich, while Raising Cane's has grown quickly, fueled by its cult fanbase and simple menu.
It's an incredibly competitive space where it's hard to differentiate your product.
The chicken category increased 5.3% in 2025, down from 9.1% in 2024 and more than 12% in 2023, according to Technomic data shared with Nation's Restaurant News.
"Last year, the category was especially impacted by slowing momentum for the biggest players. Chick-fil-A's sales grew 5.2% year-over-year, compared to 5.4% in 2024, for instance," NRN reported.
Two of the biggest names in the space actually saw sales drop.
"Popeyes' sales fell 0.5% in 2025, versus 3.9% growth in 2024. KFC had a tough 2025, with sales down 4.6%, while in 2024, its sales were down 5.2%," the data showed.
That's a significant drop over a two-year period for KFC, which may explain why the chain has been closing stores.
KFC has closed 300 stores in a year
While much of the attention has been focused on KFC's former sister brand, Pizza Hut, which was sold by Yum Brands in June, the chicken brand has also been struggling, but it has shown signs of a significant turnaround.
"KFC delivered 6% system sales growth driven by 7% unit growth and 2% same-store sales growth. Around the world, KFC teams are advancing our Raise the B.A.R. priorities, beginning with improving menu relevance," Yum Brands CEO Christopher Turner said during the chain's second-quarter earnings call.
More Restaurants:
- 52-year-old international restaurant chain closing all locations
- 46-year-old casual dining chain closes underperforming locations
- Classic burger chain has closed down all its restaurants
Closing underperforming stores can also improve a chain's overall sales performance by removing weaker locations.
"An analysis of KFC finds that at least 312 of its U.S. restaurants have permanently closed between July 15, 2025, and July 6, 2026, a 7.64% reduction in the size of the chain's American footprint," according to Local Falcon.
Local Falcon, a local AI search visibility platform, compared KFC's public store locator at the start and end of the period. Each restaurant listing that had been removed and returned a 404 error was then independently verified against Google Maps.
KFC needs an identity boost
KFC's struggles come partially because its rivals including Chick-fil-A, Popeyes, and Raising Cane's have staked out distinctive brand positions. That's something KFC has abandoned, according to RTM Nexus CEO Dominik Miserandino.