Tommy John, namesake for a pioneering elbow surgery that saved his career, dies at 83
Tommy John, who won 288 games during a 26-year big league career and became the first pitcher to successfully return following groundbreaking elbow surgery that later was named after him, has died. He was 83.
He died at his home in Bradenton, Fla., on Saturday night, agent Mike Maguire said Sunday. He had been in hospice care.
On Aug. 8, the New York Yankees released a social media post in which John wrote that he wanted to say goodbye to everyone, including friends and fans who followed him throughout his career, saying, "I will never forget you."
The Yankees called John "a bedrock of our rotation during his time in pinstripes and a longtime favorite of Yankees fans."
John was a four-time All-Star with a record of 288-231 and a 3.34 ERA during a career that stretched from 1963 to 1989. He pitched for Cleveland, the Chicago White Sox, the Los Angeles Dodgers, the Yankees, the California Angels and the Oakland Athletics.
"Tommy was an exceptional pitcher throughout his career in Major League Baseball, and his courageous role in becoming the first to have surgery that would go on to bear his name can't be overstated," Stan Kasten, Dodgers president and CEO, said in a statement. "His impact both on and off the field has been felt by ballplayers of all ages and will be for generations to come."
The left-hander was 31 years old when he tore the ulnar collateral ligament in his pitching elbow in 1974, a death knell for pitchers' careers to that point.
John allowed Dr. Frank Jobe, the Dodgers' team physician, to replace the ligament with a tendon from his right forearm. Jobe gave the surgery 100-to-1 odds of being successful.
John was a great pitcher, but his elbow surgery made him a baseball legend
The procedure had been done on others before, although it was usually performed on wrists and hands. John was the first pitcher to have it done on his elbow.
More than 2,600 big leaguers and thousands more amateurs have since had UCL reconstructions, better known as Tommy John surgery. It's been a godsend for many of baseball's greatest stars, including two-way sensation Shohei Ohtani, three-time Cy Young Award winner Justin Verlander and even Philadelphia Phillies slugger Bryce Harper.
"If you put it in dollars and cents, I think there's no question that Tommy John is the most valuable reconstructive procedure there is," Dodgers team physician Dr. Neal ElAttrache told The Associated Press in 2024.
Born Thomas Edward John Jr. on May 22, 1943, in Terre Haute, Indiana, he was a top baseball and basketball player at the city's Gerstmeyer High. He graduated in 1961 as valedictorian but did not give the commencement speech because of a stutter. Despite being recruited by the University of Kentucky to play basketball, John chose baseball and signed with Cleveland.
"The day I left for my first job as a pitcher, my father looked at me & said, 'Good luck, Tommy. Just remember one thing: whether you make it big in the big leagues or you don't, you'll always just be Tommy John from Terre Haute, Indiana.' I've never forgotten those words," John wrote in his Aug. 8 post.
John recorded 2,245 strikeouts but never led either league in wins or strikeouts. He had the second-most wins of any pitcher since 1900 not to be elected to the Hall of Fame. From 1995 through 2009, John was on the Hall of Fame ballot, but he never received more than 31.7% of the votes, falling well short of the 75% required for election.
"Tommy was a wonderful person who competed to the utmost and did what no player had ever done to save his career, in conjunction with the esteemed Dr. Frank Jobe," former Dodgers general manager Ned Colletti posted on X. "The HOF is missing Tommy John."
John won more games after his eponymous surgery
Known for his longevity, John was the opening day starter for both the 1966 Chicago White Sox and the 1989 New York Yankees. He won 124 games before his UCL repair and 164 after. His final appearance came days after his 46th birthday.
"While his incredible longevity and post-surgery achievements changed the fortunes and trajectory of countless athletes around the world, it also overshadowed his excellence as a pitcher," the Yankees said in a statement. "We pause to remember the totality of his legacy - his competitiveness and skill, his penchant for conversation, his kind and gracious nature, and his stature as an athletic and medical pioneer."
John made his major league debut on Sept. 6, 1963, pitching one inning in relief for Cleveland.
He was traded to the White Sox in 1965 and worked his way into the starting rotation. The following year, he tied for the American League lead with five shutouts and in 1967, his six shutouts led the AL.
In 1971, he was traded to the Dodgers.
In 1974, John had a 13-3 record and led the National League in victories going into the All-Star break. He was pitching against the Montreal Expos when he permanently damaged the UCL in his left arm. After a month, the injury had not improved.
During the four-hour surgery on Sept. 25, 1974, Jobe made holes in the humerus and ulna bones of John's left arm and used anchors to insert the tendon in a figure-eight pattern.
At first, John's left hand was shriveled and he lacked feeling in several of his fingers because of damage to the ulnar nerve. Jobe performed a second procedure to reroute the nerve that was necessary to John's full recovery.
John's arm was in a cast for four months. He had recovered the full range of motion in his left arm by spring training of 1975 and spent that season resting, healing and rebuilding strength in his arm. John worked with fellow Dodgers pitcher Mike Marshall, who had a doctorate in kinesiology, on learning a different grip.
That September he made five appearances during an offseason instructional league, working his way up to seven innings by his final game.
John resumed pitching for the Dodgers in 1976 as the fourth starter in their rotation. He allowed three runs in five innings and took the loss in his first start against Atlanta, the first time any pitcher had started a game following UCL reconstructive surgery.
John donated the original cast from his surgery to the Smithsonian Institution in June 2022. His teammates on the 1974 Dodgers signed it, as well as Jobe and the team's Hall of Fame announcer Vin Scully.
The procedure has become so widely known that in 2019, Merriam-Webster added the term to its dictionary.
John made 31 starts for the Dodgers in 1976, posting a 10-10 record, a 3.09 ERA, 91 strikeouts, 61 walks and 207 hits allowed in 207 innings.
In 1977, he won 20 games for the first time in his career, finishing with a 20-7 record. He finished second behind Philadelphia's Steve Carlton in voting for the NL Cy Young Award.
John and his family had mixed feelings about the legacy of his operation
Over 50 years later, Tommy John surgery is as much a part of baseball as peanuts and hot dogs. Advanced training methods are helping pitchers of all ages throw harder than ever. They take comfort knowing a torn UCL won't necessarily end their careers.
"I am sick my name is attached to a surgery happening in kids more than pros," John tweeted in July 2018.
John's oldest son, Tommy III, became a chiropractor who wrote a book suggesting ways to prevent young athletes from having to undergo major sports-related surgery similar to what his father endured.
After his pitching career ended, John worked as a broadcaster for the Minnesota Twins and Yankees in the 1990s. He managed the Bridgeport (Connecticut) Bluefish from 2007-09.
John was hospitalized in December 2020 because of COVID-19 and later had Guillain-Barré syndrome, in which a person's immune system attacks their nerves. John told the New York Post in May 2022 that he was paralyzed in his lower extremities for several months.
John and his wife Sally Simmons had four children: Tamara, Tommy III, Travis and Taylor, who died of a prescription drug overdose at 28 in 2010. The couple divorced in 2013.
Besides his children, he is survived by his second wife, Cheryl, and son-in-law Patrick Mannelly, a retired NFL long snapper who played 16 years for the Chicago Bears.