The band playing when a Bangkok bar caught fire mourns its members among the 33 dead
BANGKOK - Victims of this week's flash fire at a Bangkok music bar that took more than 30 lives included four of the six core members of the band playing when the blaze broke out.
The fate of the Totsakan band has been a key focus in Thailand's coverage of the blaze, and as residents expressed their sadness, confusion, outrage and demands for compensation on Wednesday, the sister of the group's late keyboard player struck a particular note of grace.
"If I can be his representative, I think he would say he doesn't want to see everyone sad and cry," said Chanyanuch Pudmon, the sister of keyboard player Preutthipong Pudmon, as she and other family members retrieved his body from Bangkok's Institute of Forensic Science. "He would not want everyone to see him as he is now, but please remember his smile on stage, playing music that he loves."
The fire that broke out Sunday night killed at least 33 people and injured dozens, with 17 hospitalized in critical condition, Erawan emergency services said. Wiroon Supasingsiripreecha, chief of the forensic institute, told reporters Wednesday that most of the victims died from smoke inhalation, while a few died from burn injuries.
What set off the blaze at the Rong Beer Na Ladprao bar in northern Bangkok and why it caused so many casualties is under investigation. Authorities are looking at whether the venue's ceiling had especially flammable soundproofing foam, whether its exits were accessible and unlocked and whether the venue was legally registered.
The band played good-time music every Sunday
Totsakan was a house band at the bar, and every Sunday they played the kind of good-time roots music that is popular especially in rural areas where traditional beats are played on modern instruments.
The band's members were among the first to spy a spark from a circuit breaker that may have set off the blaze that roared across the ceiling, which experts suspect was covered with highly combustible material. People rushed for the few and narrow exits in what they said was total darkness.
The chaos was such that even after the blaze was brought under control by firefighters and the injured taken to hospitals, it was unclear who had survived and who had perished. However for the band's leader and singer, Atipat Wijan -- nickname "Ice" -- a big blow came right away.
In an interview with Thai TV Channel 3 just hours after the flames were extinguished, he recalled how the band's bass player called him to tell him that Nahatai Sajjalert, the lead female singer nicknamed "Breeze′′ - who was also his girlfriend - was undergoing CPR in back of the still-smoldering building.
Ice said he tried helping the EMS team resuscitate her, but she could not be revived.
"She wasn't burned at all. Her body was completely intact. She just looked like she was peacefully asleep," he recalled.
Ice said it was originally believed that keyboardist Preutthipong -- nickname "Kwang" -- had been found and hospitalized, but that was a misunderstanding. He never made it out of the bar. Nattapat Thamnita, or "Biw," the band's drummer, was evacuated in critical condition, but also did not survive.
A fourth band member died Wednesday
Misery extended to Wednesday when the band announced that its other male singer, Thitiwat Kaewkanha, had died in hospital. He was initially feared dead, but had then turned up hospitalized after a day of frantic searching. According to Thai Rath, Thailand's most popular newspaper, Thitiwat, whose nickname is "Din," had burns over 80% of his body.
Other survivors and family members of victims of the fire visited a police station on Wednesday to seek compensation, gather belongings and give their testimony.
Natthaphong Lakhorn, 26, was at the beer hall on the night of the fire with four companions. He was sitting near the stage when the fire broke out. He recounted seeing white smoke coming from the stage, which he at first thought was an effect from dry ice before realizing it was the start of a fire.
"When the fire broke, I just ran, and then all power went out," said Natthaphong, who said that one of his companions, a relative, died in the fire. "It was so hectic."
Natthaphong said he escaped through the back door of the bar near the bathrooms and that there was a security guard there who was using a flashlight to lead people out, contradicting reports from police that the door was not used. He said he did not recall hearing a fire alarm.
Bandages covered both of Natthaphong's ears and part of his forehead. Before registering with the police, he said that he plans to seek compensation for his injuries.
Kanticha Singkhon, 25, was at the police station to pick up a handbag and other personal belongings of her mother, who died in the fire. With her mother gone, Kanticha said she is now responsible for her younger brother. She said she wanted the bar owners to be the ones who reach out to the victim's families "because they would be going back to their hometowns by now. They won't have time because each victim came from far away," she said.
A lawyer representing the bar owners told local media that survivors and family members will initially receive 10,000 baht (approximately $300) in compensation.
"It's not enough money for a funeral - I had to take a loan to arrange my mom's funeral," Kanticha said. "I have not had any financial arrangements, and no one has contacted me."