French lawmakers approve a sweeping social media ban for children under 15
PARIS - France banned children under 15 from using social media on Tuesday, becoming the first country in the European Union to pass a blanket ban on the platforms as concerns grow worldwide over the harmful effects of digital content on kids.
Both chambers of the Parliament voted in favor of the measure, a flagship initiative of French President Emmanuel Macron's second term. The bill also bans the use of mobile phones in high schools.
Several families in France have sued TikTok over teen suicides they say are linked to harmful content. Children's advocates and parents applauded the vote.
"We've been campaigning for this bill from the start because, frankly, we have no other option, no other way to counter tech giants," said Gaëlle Berbonde, a 52-year-old who lives in the Paris region. "The only thing we can do is protect our children, just as we protect our children from drinking alcohol."
Berbonde told The Associated Press that her daughter was in seventh grade when she got her first smartphone. A parental control app helped monitor what she did online, but Berbonde had no idea what TikTok really was. After a few months, the family realized that the daughter was cutting herself and was suffering from anorexia and depression. She spent a year and a half in the hospital but is now 16 and well.
Macron wants the ban in place for the new school year
The legislation is one of the final major measures adopted under Macron's presidency before he leaves office next year. Macron wants the law to take effect at the start of the new school year in September. However, a review to determine whether the bill complies with the French Constitution is likely to take place and could delay its implementation.
"France is leading the way in Europe in protecting our children and our teenagers," Macron said. "We will keep on going."
The ban won't cover online encyclopedias, or educational or scientific directories.
Lawmakers from the left-wing party France Unbowed opposed the bill, arguing that its constitutionality is unclear, that it would effectively end online anonymity, and that it would be impossible to enforce.
Ines Legendre, a legal adviser for the online protection group e-Enfance, said the law will not immediately translate into an outright ban.
"We'll also have to address the issue of existing accounts for those under 15. How do we identify them? How do we suspend them? And then there's the question of age verification for all new accounts that will come into effect," she said.
According to France's health watchdog, one in two teenagers spends between two and five hours a day on a smartphone. In a report published in December, it said that some 90% of children between 12 and 17 use smartphones daily to access the internet, with 58% of them using their devices for social networks.
The report highlighted a range of harmful effects stemming from the use of social networks, including reduced self-esteem and increased exposure to content associated with risky behaviors such as self-harm, drug use and suicide.
After the European Commission found that the latest version of the bill overlapped with the EU's Digital Services Act, which sets strict rules aimed at keeping internet users safe online, lawmakers held final negotiations Monday. They reached an agreement on an amended version of the legislation, which was then submitted to both chambers for a final vote.
Other countries implement restrictions
Growing awareness of the dangers social media poses for young, developing brains has shown up in a wave of new restrictions globally.
In 2024, Australia became the first country to kick kids under 16 off social media. The law makes platforms - including TikTok, Facebook, Snapchat, Reddit, X and Instagram - liable for fines of up to 50 million Australian dollars ($35 million) if they fail to prevent children younger than 16 from holding accounts.
In Europe, Spain's prime minister Pedro Sánchez announced in February that the country wants to limit social media access for children under 16. Denmark and Greece have unveiled plans for bans for youngsters while the United Kingdom said it would also consider banning young teenagers.
European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen - the EU's top executive - earlier this month called for limits to be placed on children using social media. A special EU panel looking into the issue recommended forbidding access for those under 13 until tech companies can prove their platforms are safe.
Von der Leyen said that children under 3 should have no exposure to screens at all. She noted infinite scrolling as one of the "addictive" traits that tech companies must address. The European Commission is likely to come up with a proposal for the 27 member countries to consider in the near future.