How to fight with the people we care about, illustrated
Life Kit
Want more intimacy in your relationships? Conflict could help
Should we argue with the people we love? For Priya Parker, author of a book published in September, The Art of Fighting: The Transformative Power of Conflict, the answer is yes.
While many people dread conflict, it's not necessarily a bad thing. In fact, it's necessary if we want to be in close, authentic relationships, says Parker. So when you have a moment of misalignment with someone, try thinking of it as a signal. There's something here to talk about.
"We assume if the heat is rising, this must be bad. But the reframe is that there's something relevant here. I should pay attention," she says.
Parker, who has been a conflict resolution facilitator for 20 years, shares advice about common questions you may have about getting into fights - whether that's with a partner, a family member or a friend.
Navied Mahdavian is a New Yorker cartoonist and the author of the graphic memoir This Country: Searching for Home in (Very) Rural America.
More comics from Life Kit
Still cringing about that awkward moment? Here's what to do about it. Experts demystify the science of awkwardness - and explain how to reduce the emotional intensity of mortifying flashbacks (like that one time you called your teacher "Mommy").
To raise a confident little talker, learn to speak 'parentese'. So you've got a baby in your life. How do you talk to them, exactly? In this comic, experts explain why conversing with your baby is important - and share ways to help them develop their language skills.
Don't panic! 6 strategies to keep you calm in a crisis. House fires, mass shootings, emergency medical procedures and mental health crises. Emergencies can happen at any time - and knowing how to overcome feelings of panic, stress and indecision can be a matter of life or death.
This digital story was edited by Malaka Gharib. The visual editor is CJ Riculan. We'd love to hear from you. Email us at LifeKit@npr.org. Listen to Life Kit on Apple Podcasts and Spotify, and sign up for our newsletter.