Palestinian American returns to his West Bank home, under siege by Israeli settlers
QUSRA, West Bank - The Palestinian American whose home in the occupied West Bank has been besieged by Israeli settlers for over a week traveled to his property on Monday to join other family members who have been defending it.
The standoff, in the village of Qusra, has seen groups of settlers surround several Palestinian houses and prevent residents from leaving. The United States has condemned the siege and the Israeli military has deployed troops it says are there to maintain order.
The siege of Palestinian homes by Israeli settlers comes as violence in the West Bank has soared in recent months. The settlers, emboldened by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's right-wing government, have ramped up attacks on Palestinian towns and villages, harassing residents and setting homes, mosques and fields ablaze.
Israeli soldiers and settlers have killed 87 Palestinians so far this year, according to Palestinian health officials. Palestinians have killed three Israelis, including two who were killed during clashes in the West Bank village of Tell last month.
As Loui Ridi, an Ohio-based owner of one of the houses, landed in Israel, settlers were still roaming near Qusra, according to video footage taken by his brother. It showed settlers driving ATVs and speaking with soldiers.
Ridi had also watched the scenes unfold from afar through his home security cameras.
"I've been watching this live for many days and now this is the second week. I can't sleep," he told reporters at Israel's main international airport. "I can't let the settlers steal my house while I was watching."
He finally arrived in Qusra on Monday evening, where he first reunited with his mother and sister before moving on to his house. Ridi's brother, Qusai Abu Rida, and his teenage son had stayed inside the home to protect the property.
As Ridi waited for Israel's military to escort him to the house, he said he believed little had changed since early last week, when the siege began.
Israel has since declared the neighborhood where Ridi's home is located a closed military zone. But on Monday, his brother's footage still showed soldiers interacting amicably with settlers.
"I should be able to go to my house freely, anytime I want," he said. "It is a frustration and a nightmare for the entire family."