France evacuates thousands as fires displace a third of a million in southwest Europe
LEGE-CAP FERRET, France - French authorities ordered 4,000 more people evacuated from tourist sites along its Atlantic coast on Tuesday, widening what may be France's largest peacetime evacuation as returning heat threatened firefighters' fragile hold on a vast wildfire west of Bordeaux.
Fresh flames erupted later Tuesday near Grand Crohot, a popular Atlantic beach on the Lège-Cap-Ferret peninsula, local authorities said. A fleet of 23 planes and helicopters - up from 18 - dropped water and fire retardant as crews fought to keep the renewed flames from spreading.
"The situation remains complicated. That's clear. We're not out of the woods," Gironde prefect Sophie Brocas said.
She said that about 60,000 residents who were evacuated as a precaution from Le Haillan and parts of Mérignac and Eysines outside Bordeaux's ring road could return on Tuesday. No fires had broken out in the three areas, but residents were told to keep their mobile phones on and emergency bags packed.
The opposing movements - thousands ordered out of coastal resorts while those returning told to be on the alert - underscored how precarious the fire's hold remained.
Across France and Spain, roughly 330,000 people have been driven from homes and vacation sites by huge wildfires. Spain braced for its fourth heat wave of the summer, with several blazes still burning out of control, including the largest in its recorded history.
Even so, Spanish authorities began lifting evacuation and stay-at-home orders for thousands of people after firefighters made progress overnight.
The Gironde fire has burned an area four times the size of Paris and forced 220,000 people to evacuate. Interior Minister Laurent Nuñez has said it is "very likely" the largest civilian evacuation operation carried out in the country outside war.
Evacuations don't deter some vacationers
The precautionary evacuation order covered campsites, holiday villages, tourist residences and leisure parks around the resort of Lacanau, Gironde regional authorities said.
"We are at a point of fragility," Eric Brocardi, spokesperson for France's national firefighters federation, told the BFMTV broadcast network Tuesday. "We will continue attacking this fire despite the forecast rise in temperatures."
Even as nearby homes burned and authorities urged tourists to stay away, one family told Le Parisien newspaper it had gone ahead with its trip rather than forfeit a 4,000-euro ($4,558) holiday, while another group debated abandoning a vacation that had cost 650 euros ($741) each.
A fire making its own weather
At its most violent, the Gironde blaze created a gargantuan black thundercloud, electrified and lit from within. It generated lightning, violent winds and new fires beyond the original front. The phenomenon, known as a pyrocumulonimbus cloud, was the first recorded in France.
France's national weather service placed Gironde under a yellow heat warning beginning at midday Tuesday, forecasting inland temperatures of 33 to 35 C (91 to 95 F).
More than 1,160 square kilometers (448 square miles) have burned across France this year, according to the Interior Ministry.
Europe is the world's fastest-warming continent, heating at more than twice the global average, according to the European Union's Copernicus climate service. Western Europe recorded its hottest June on record, with extreme heat and widespread dryness contributing to the spread and intensification of fires in France and Spain, Copernicus said.
Crews defend homes and cut firebreaks
In Le Porge alone, west of Bordeaux, the municipal government said about 150 homes were destroyed.
Officials warned that smoldering vegetation, rising temperatures and falling humidity could produce fresh outbreaks along the fire's vast perimeter.
Military engineers and forest-fire prevention crews resumed cutting firebreaks early Tuesday. Authorities said crews had completed 103 kilometers (64 miles) of firebreaks.
At least 110 firefighters have been injured, the prefecture said.
Thousands return as second fire stops advancing
In Landes, about 15,000 evacuees - roughly half of those displaced here - were allowed home after a separate wildfire stopped advancing.
"The fire is fixed, which is good news in the Landes," French President Emmanuel Macron said Monday evening. Regional authorities said that meant its advance had stopped and no new outbreaks had been reported.
Those allowed back included residents of Sanguinet, Parentis-en-Born, Biscarrosse's aviation village and a large campground. Several other neighborhoods remained inaccessible.
Authorities warned that the Landes fire was not extinguished. Residual hot spots, wind and drought could cause flare-ups, and surveillance and damping-down operations were expected to continue for days or weeks.
Thousands begin returning in Spain
Spanish firefighters made progress Tuesday, and authorities began lifting evacuation orders for at least 20,000 of the 79,000 people forced to flee over the weekend.
Francisco Martín, the central government's representative in the Madrid region, said orders would be lifted in 10 towns, allowing about 20,000 evacuees to return home and ending stay-at-home orders for another 14,000 people.
Residents of some villages in Ávila were also being allowed home, though authorities did not specify how many. Another 6,000 people could return after a smaller fire near Toledo was brought under control, while several thousand more went home in Castellón.
Hundreds of firefighters backed by military emergency brigades and water-dropping aircraft continued battling several major wildfires.
Smoke from the fires reached Madrid in recent days. Emergency services said residents in central and eastern districts could smell smoke and ash.
Spanish Interior Minister Fernando Grande-Marlaska said Tuesday that nonstop work through the night left him "reasonably positive," though officials warned that crews had only a brief window before extreme heat returned.
Spain's national weather service said the country was bracing for its fourth heat wave of the summer, with temperatures expected to exceed 40 C (104 F) in some areas.
The government declared a national emergency over the fires.
At least 13 people have died in wildfires in Spain this year, making 2026 one of the country's deadliest fire seasons in decades.
"I've been living in San Martín de Valdeiglesias for 20 years and I never thought I would see this," said Estella Costales, an evacuated resident staying at a temporary shelter in Brunete, near Madrid. "It's unfortunate, but I never thought I would see such destruction."
Surroundings of Madrid remain at risk
The greatest concern was two large fires that had at times come close to merging into a single blaze in wooded hills about an hour's drive west of Madrid.
A fire in hilly, rural terrain in Ávila, west of Madrid, has become Spain's largest on record, scorching more than 500 square kilometers (193 square miles), the government said.
Local weather services in Ávila also shared images Tuesday of what they described as a pyrocumulonimbus cloud over the blaze. Spain has seen these fire-generated thunderstorms form at least twice during wildfires in recent years.
"Look at how the valley is burned. Look at the houses, the people," said David Gonzalez, a 48-year-old gardener who used his van to deliver supplies to firefighters in Ávila.
"We are feeling a lot of anger and helplessness. It's something inhuman," he said.
Fires have burned 1,530 square kilometers (590 square miles) this year in Spain, Ecology Minister Sara Aagesen said.
Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez has called for a national pact to fight wildfires, saying climate change is making them worse.