Turkey's parliament approves a pardon-like bill for thousands of PKK militants
ANKARA, Turkey - Turkey's parliament on Monday approved legislation that would introduce a conditional pardon for thousands of Kurdish militants in a bid to advance the government's peace initiative with their insurgent group.
Legislators voted 468-88 in favor of the measure that would only come into effect after Turkish authorities have verified that the Kurdistan Workers' Party, or PKK, has fully disarmed.
The PKK announced last year that it is ending its decades-long armed campaign against the Turkish state, declaring a decision to dissolve itself as part of the peace effort. The move came in response to a call from its imprisoned leader, Abdullah Ocalan.
The group then staged a symbolic disarmament ceremony in northern Iraq, where it is based, and announced that it was withdrawing fighters from key locations in Turkey to Iraq.
Law could have regional implications
The measure, which is a step toward ending a conflict that has killed tens of thousands of people, could have implications beyond Turkey's borders, leading to closer Turkish-Iraqi ties. It could also support the Syrian government's efforts to integrate areas that were under the control of the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces, affiliated with the PKK.
It also offers Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan the opportunity to court the support of the pro-Kurdish DEM party to help him remain in office beyond the presidential two-term limit. Erdogan could run again if parliament calls an early election during his current term.
The 12-article legislation outlines the procedures for the group's disarmament and the rehabilitation of thousands of PKK members.
It will suspend some prison sentences for convicted PKK members and postpone ongoing investigations and trials against others for five or 10 years, depending on the severity of the alleged offenses. If no terror-related crime is committed within the time frame, the cases will be dropped.
Militants convicted of intentional killings and those sentenced to life terms before 2005 are excluded from the bill's provisions. This applies to Ocalan and other senior PKK figures.
The proposal also sets up ministerial and parliamentary committees to monitor the disarmament process. The measures will come into effect only after Turkey's National Security Council confirms that the group has disbanded and surrendered all weapons.
Those wanting to benefit from the law will have six months to apply after the National Security Council's decision is published in the official gazette.
Media reports have said exiled PKK members and those in Iraq and Syria are expected to benefit.
"With the armed organization laying down its arms and dissolving itself, we will build a new era in which peace, brotherhood, and solidarity will prevail," Parliament Speaker Numan Kurtulmus told reporters following the vote.
PKK says the legislation is a start but many things are missing
The PKK-linked ANF news outlet carried a statement from the group in which it said that the Turkish legislation is a "beginning" to resolving the outstanding issues but has "serious shortcomings and deficiencies." It called for Ocalan's release from prison, saying that the peace process can move forward only if he "lives and works freely."
It also said that the legislation failed to address demands for democratic reforms and Kurdish rights, adding that PKK fighters would not give up their weapons and return to Turkey "if, upon returning to Turkey, they are unable to engage in democratic politics on the basis of freedom of thought and freedom of association, and if they are prosecuted and imprisoned because of their views or the organizations they establish."
"The people of Turkey, who have paid a heavy price for many years, now have an opportunity to consolidate peace and build democracy," Gulistan Kilic Kocyigit, of the pro-Kurdish Peoples' Equality and Democracy Party, or DEM, told parliament.
"Of course, the proposal has shortcomings, and we now have a responsibility to address these shortcomings," she added, in an apparent reference to demands for greater rights for Kurds and for democratic reforms.
Musavat Dervisoglu, the leader of the center-right nationalist Good Party, which opposes the bill, said it "would pave the way" for Erdogan to stay in power.
Ocalan's release is not in the cards, but conditions might improve
DEM has lobbied for Ocalan, who has been imprisoned since 1999, to be granted official status to coordinate the transition process, leading to his release.
The current proposal, however, makes no mention of Ocalan's status or possible release.
Media reports have suggested, however, that Ocalan's conditions in his island prison off Istanbul will likely be improved, giving him broader visiting conditions and communication with the outside world.
The PKK has waged an armed insurgency since 1984 that has claimed tens of thousands of lives and spilled into Iraq and Syria. It has been designated a terrorist organization by Turkey, the United States and the European Union.
The group initially sought an independent Kurdish state but later shifted to demands for autonomy and expanded rights in Turkey.
Previous peace efforts between Turkey and the PKK have failed, most recently in 2015.