Former U.S. Marine held in Russia on disputed charges has been released
WASHINGTON - Russia released an American military veteran on Tuesday, allowing his return to the U.S. after four years of what his family and U.S. officials allege was wrongful incarceration and abusive treatment that left him near death.
Robert Gilman, a 32-year-old Massachusetts teacher and former Marine, was freed after President Donald Trump said he spoke with Russian President Vladimir Putin about his release, which Trump said was "very much on a Humanitarian Basis."
"We appreciate this decision, and the fact that Russia asked for no one in return - No exchange took place," Trump said on his Truth Social platform.
Arrests of Americans have become increasingly common in Russia in recent years. Concern has risen that Russia could be targeting U.S. nationals to use later as bargaining chips in talks to bring back Russians convicted of crimes in the U.S. and Europe. Five other Americans remain imprisoned in Russia with deteriorating medical issues, according to a news release from Global Reach, a group that's been working to free them.
Secretary of State Marco Rubio posted a photo on social media of a gaunt-looking Gilman draped in an American flag and surrounded by his family aboard an airplane.
"While we appreciate this positive step, we are still seeking the immediate return of all other unjustly detained Americans," Rubio stated.
Gilman will arrive at Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland outside of Washington on Tuesday evening, Trump said in his post.
"I just spoke to him, and he had one request - A GREAT cheeseburger when he lands," Trump wrote. "I will take care of that!"
Gilman is bound for a military hospital in Texas, where he will be medically and psychologically assessed and treated, Eric Lebson, chief strategy officer of Global Reach, said in a statement.
Gilman had his prison sentence extended three times
Gilman was detained in 2022 on charges of beating a police officer after being taken off a train for causing a disturbance. He was convicted and handed a 3.5-year sentence.
He later was convicted of attacking a prison inspector during a cell check, beating an investigator and assaulting a guard. In October 2024, he was sentenced to eight years and one month. His sentence was extended in December to 10 years after he was found guilty of assaulting prison guards.
Russian media reported that he pleaded guilty to the charges and apologized to the guards he was charged with assaulting. The business daily Kommersant said he explained his actions by saying he wanted to stay in the prison where he was serving his sentence and avoid being moved to another penitentiary.
Gilman's father has disputed the charges against his son, while the State Department has said the U.S. determined that Gilman was wrongfully detained,
Gilman's sister, Lexie Hudson, credited Trump and U.S. Sen. Ed Markey of Massachusetts with bringing about his release.
"There is no other reason that Robert is alive today other than that President Trump heard about the case and took action," said Hudson, who thanked Markey "for leading our advocacy efforts in Congress."
"The Russians treated my brother so badly," Hudson said. "They hurt him for no reason, other than that he was both an American and a Marine. What did they get out of this? Why did they do this to such a wonderful person?"
Russian officials did not immediately comment on Gilman's release. Russia's Federal Penitentiary Service did not respond to a request for comment on his health deteriorating behind bars.
Gilman was hospitalized before his release
Gilman's lawyer Irina Brazhnikova told the Russian news agency Interfax on Friday that Gilman was in a psychiatric ward of a civilian hospital, where he's been since early July.
He was there "due to a psychiatric condition," and according to doctors, his condition has worsened, but neither his defense lawyers, nor his family were allowed to visit, she said.
Before Gilman was flown out of Russia, he had been in "a dissociative stupor" for 47 days due to the abuse he had suffered in prison, according to Lebson. After Gilman was moved to the hospital, he was hooked up to a feeding tube and handcuffed to a bed.
Hospital reports conveyed Gilman's condition "as dire and life-threatening," pushing the U.S. government into action and leading to his release, Lebson said.
Markey had called on Russia and the U.S. to work together to get Gilman released. He was among at least eight Americans who remained in Russian custody after a series of high-profile prisoner exchanges with the U.S. in recent years.
Markey blamed Russia for Gilman's poor health, saying his return to the U.S. was long overdue.
"It is a tragedy that it took Robert's near-death condition for his case to receive the attention that it required for his release to be negotiated," Markey said. "Throughout his detention, Robert was subjected to physical torture, forced medication, and provocations by Russian authorities. There is no doubt that his treatment by Russian authorities is the reason Robert is in this precarious state today."