New data compiled by a Bay Area anti-surveillance advocacy group shows that not only are American localities dropping cameras from Flock Safety, but they are doing it at an accelerating rate.
Communities from Lansing, Michigan, to Pflugerville, Texas, are ending their relationship with Flock, largely over concerns regarding out-of-control surveillance, unwanted data sharing, high expenses, and reports of police abusing the tool.
Secure Justice, an Oakland-based advocacy group, has recorded 214 cities and counties that have dropped Flock since 2021. Of those, 90 ended their relationship with Flock in August 2026 alone, a fourfold increase compared to the previous month.
Put another way: During the last 30 days, an average of three localities per day have halted contracts with Flock.
"Looking at that image, it's gone parabolic!" Brian Hofer, the executive director of Secure Justice, told Ars.
Hofer, who until 2025 served as chair of the Oakland Privacy Advisory Commission for 10 years, recognized that while 210 remains relatively small, the momentum is growing rapidly.
"When you see that now 165 [cancellations] are just in the first almost eight months of this year... At that speed, if it goes another year, we're talking serious money," he said. "That number is going to get huge, fast."
When presented with this data, Flock Safety did not express concern. "So far in 2026, new city partnerships have outpaced nonrenewals by approximately 10 to one," emailed Courtney Terlecki, a company spokesperson. "That does not mean every community will make the same decision, and we understand that public safety technology deserves thoughtful public discussion and community engagement."
She declined to say precisely how many new customers Flock has taken on this year, but the company has repeatedly said that its products are "trusted by over 5,000 communities."
Criticism
After extensive criticism, Flock CEO Garrett Langley wrote in a recent blog post that Flock would reduce data retention defaults from 30 days to seven, among other privacy-minded changes.