Heidi Overton, President Trump's nominee to lead the Food and Drug Administration, went before the Senate health committee Thursday, facing questions about her stances on vaccines, flavored vapes, birth control, and abortion, among other issues. She spent nearly two hours stonewalling senators, even on softball questions.
Overton, a physician with a doctoral degree in clinical investigation, is currently the deputy assistant to the president for domestic policy. She previously worked at a conservative think tank and has taken a clear stance opposing abortion, raising obvious questions about her objectivity. The FDA is currently reviewing the safety of the abortion pill, mifepristone, despite extensive data showing it is extremely safe.
Overton also notably stood behind President Trump at a press conference in August during which Trump falsely called the measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine "quite lethal." He further claimed that vaccine doses for infants are "like the size of a soda bottle," and called for the MMR vaccine to be split into three separate immunizations, despite no evidence of benefit from such a split and no such individual immunizations being available in the US.
Vaccine contradictions
In the hearing, Overton directly contradicted Trump on several occasions, saying at various times that "the MMR vaccine is not lethal" and that "the MMR vaccine is safe and effective."
Still, when Sen. Maggie Hassan (D-NH), asked "Do you think it's possible for the president to ever be wrong about something?" Overton dodged. Instead of answering the question, she began spouting a non-answer that started with: "I've had the privilege of working for the president for over a year and a half and have had robust discussions with him."
Hassan cut her off, pressing: "Is it possible for him to be wrong?" But again, Overton was evasive.
Hassan asked her if she thought the MMR vaccine might be lethal. Again, Overton said it was safe and effective. "So," Hassan asked,"was the president wrong when he suggested that the combined measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine may be lethal?"