For a child bursting with energy, few things are more fun than hurtling through a bouncy castle, launching into the air, and ping-ponging between every surface. But that childhood buoyancy will quickly deflate when it turns out those surfaces are smeared with a hypervirulent, multidrug-resistant pathogen.
That was the horrifying reality for a community in Ireland in fall 2025. Neighbors had gathered for an afternoon of merriment, complete with a barbecue, a sweets station, and three bouncy castles. Officials estimate that about 120 people joined the festivities, and around half of them were children and teens. Within a day, some children began developing signs of an infection. In all, 48 children in the community developed aggressive skin and soft-tissue infections.
Of the 48 cases, 33 were treated by their regular doctor, and 15 sought emergency care. Four children ended up being hospitalized. Luckily, all of the children recovered. The results of the outbreak investigation were reported this week in the journal Eurosurveillance.
Party crashers
Local health officials became alerted to the outbreak nine days after the event, when a 12-year-old boy was hospitalized for a skin infection. His doctors had determined he was infected with MRSA-aka methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. By then, there were around 25 other, less severe cases identified.
Genomic sequencing revealed the outbreak was caused by a rare strain of MRSA capable of producing a cytotoxin called Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL). This toxin can destroy immune cells and spark inflammation. It's often linked to necrotic lesions.
The bacterium's hostilities were clear in the outbreak; most of the infected children developed symptoms within four days of the event, much faster than the usual incubation period of 4-10 days. Some saw their infections develop within hours. The infected children reported a range of skin and soft tissue symptoms, including spots, pustules, blisters, and abscesses. Most of the skin infections erupted on the children's legs, particularly their thighs, fitting with an exposure in the bouncy castles. Twelve cases also reported systemic symptoms, such as fever, nausea, or vomiting.