Most implants like pacemakers and insulin pumps work in isolation. To help them coordinate with each other, a team of Georgia Tech researchers built a networking system that sends signals through body tissue instead of antennas and radio waves.
Radio problems
Implants that communicate today mostly rely on radio protocols like Bluetooth Low Energy or near-field communication (NFC). Both are a poor fit for in-body data transfer, says Alex Abramson, a Georgia Tech engineer and co-author of the new study.
The first problem is power. "If you want an implant to remain in an active state such that it can respond within milliseconds, it's very difficult to do that with the Bluetooth system," Abramson said. According to the paper, Bluetooth components, when they're activated, can cut an implant's battery life by up to 90 percent.
The second problem is that radio waves don't travel well through the body. "Bluetooth and near-field communication are attenuated quite a lot in the tissue," Abramson said. He said that implant-to-implant radio communication systems run into attenuation issues if the signal has to travel more than one centimeter through the tissue. Then there's size. Radio needs antennas, and commercial Bluetooth components require a device at least five millimeters wide. Implants thinner than three millimeters can be injected with a syringe at an outpatient clinic; bigger ones usually need surgery.
The fix Abramson's team came up is called SWANS (Smart Wireless Autonomous Networking System) and was inspired by the way body's own internal communication networks. "The nervous system can take a lot of inputs from all over the body, harvest all that data, and make a specific decision. And our system mimics that," Abramson said. SWANS relies on ionic conduction just like neurons, which communicate by shuttling sodium and potassium ions through their membranes, creating voltage differences. "But instead of using nerves, we use normal body tissue to send those signals," Abramson said.