The European Space Agency is moving "full steam ahead" with development of a robotic mission to Venus after NASA officials determined they were unlikely to fulfill a commitment to provide a US-built radar instrument for the spacecraft, the mission's project scientist said.
The European orbiter, named Envision, will map the Venusian surface at 10 times higher resolution than the last radar mission sent to Venus by NASA in the 1990s. The planet is enshrouded in a blanket of thick clouds of sulfuric acid, rendering its mysterious surface unseen by optical cameras in orbit. Radar is the most effective way to penetrate the clouds of Venus to reveal the terrain below, and scientists will use Envision to look for signs of active volcanism.
NASA and ESA signed a memorandum of understanding in 2024 outlining their partnership on Envision. NASA agreed to supply a US-made synthetic aperture radar instrument, Envision's primary means of mapping the surface of Venus, along with providing tracking and communications support through NASA's Deep Space Network. In exchange, ESA would include US researchers on Envision's science team. Europe would build the Envision spacecraft and the rest of its science instruments and provide the launch on an Ariane 6 rocket.
But NASA's budget for science missions is under the gun from the Trump administration, which proposed slashing the agency's science funding nearly in half in fiscal years 2026 and 2027. Congress rejected most of the cuts in 2026, when lawmakers passed a budget with $2.54 billion for NASA's planetary science division, far above the White House's request, but about $220 million shy of last year's funding.
That saved several key science missions from the chopping block, including one of NASA's own Venus missions, called DAVINCI, designed to send an entry probe into the planet's crushing atmosphere. But the shortfall is forcing NASA managers to make tough decisions. The primary targets for cuts in science are NASA's funding for operating missions, especially those well beyond their original design lives, and support for partnerships on international missions.