The Trump administration's blacklisting of Anthropic was illegal, a federal judge ruled in an order vacating government directives against the use of the firm's AI technology.
The government illegally retaliated against Anthropic by designating it a supply-chain risk to national security, said yesterday's ruling by Judge Rita Lin in the US District Court for the Northern District of California. The maker of Claude AI technology was barred by the US after it refused to drop restrictions on the use of its products for lethal autonomous warfare and mass surveillance of Americans, the ruling said.
"The undisputed record shows that the challenged actions constituted unlawful retaliation in violation of the First Amendment," Lin wrote in an order that granted key portions of Anthropic's motion for summary judgment.
As Lin noted, Trump and Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth "ordered all federal agencies to permanently stop using Anthropic's products, and banned all defense contractors from doing any business with Anthropic, even if unrelated to the military." Lin vacated those government actions and ordered the Trump administration to rescind the directives that she deemed illegal.
National security is not blank check to retaliate
"Though the Department of War is undisputedly free to select the AI vendor of its choice, the evidence demonstrates that the broad measures imposed on Anthropic were illegal and baseless," Lin wrote, referring to the Trump administration's preferred name for the Department of Defense. "The empty invocation of national security is not a blank check to punish and retaliate against government critics," she added.
The Trump administration provided only a "slim" justification to the court, Lin wrote, stating that the federal defendants "have now backed away from the thrust of their risk assessment, which relied on Anthropic having backdoor access to its technology once deployed in a national security system. It is now clear that Anthropic undisputedly lacks any such access and that, as Defendants concede, Anthropic's technology is itself no riskier to the national security than any other 'black box' artificial intelligence model."