Amazon's artificial intelligence ambitions will soon be partly fueled by a natural gas-burning power plant in Texas that "could become the largest single source of climate pollution in the United States," The New York Times reported.
These gas-burning plants are increasingly lumped into data center projects. They produce harmful pollutants, which can accelerate climate change impacts and harm public health-contributing to conditions like asthma, heart disease, lung cancer, and strokes. Some communities are demanding more stringent environmental reviews, but the Trump administration favors fast-tracking that can include skipping the permitting process entirely.
Since Elon Musk's xAI controversially began relying on gas turbines last spring to power its biggest AI data center, Colossus, there has been public backlash to off-the-grid data centers like the one Amazon is building.
Notably, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in Mississippi sued xAI to get Musk's gas turbines turned off in June. That spurred the Trump administration to join the fight, backing xAI and arguing that citizens have no power to enforce the Clean Air Act.
However, as xAI and Trump pushed to dismiss the lawsuit, reports show that other AI giants have largely ignored mounting public criticism since it was filed. They've increasingly invested in various ways to avoid permitting discussions and supply their own power-including Anthropic, Google, Meta, Microsoft, OpenAI, and Oracle. Together with Amazon's investments, these alternative power plant projects swiftly securing approvals have become a harbinger that, unlike other data center fights that have successfully blocked $130 billion in projects so far this year, resistance against gas-burning plants may be futile. A potential loss in the xAI fight could devastate momentum in communities hoping to keep up the fight for more transparency.
Dozens of firms have begun sourcing their own power supplies in the past year, but the Texas project is reportedly Amazon's first big investment in an off-the-grid data center.