After a nearly monthlong delay, states are now able to order this season's COVID-19 vaccines through a federal program that provides free immunizations to low-income children, the US health department says. Trump officials have still not provided a clear explanation for the delay, raising concerns about meddling from anti-vaccine Health Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr.
On Wednesday, Ars Technica reported that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention had still not opened ordering for 2026-2027 COVID-19 vaccines through the Vaccines for Children program. That was despite the vaccines having been approved by the Food and Drug Administration in late August.
The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) told Ars on Wednesday that "CDC has not yet finalized procurement decisions" for the shots. The department's statement further suggested Trump officials were questioning whether children should receive them. "HHS and CDC are committed to responsible stewardship of taxpayer resources and to ensuring that vaccines purchased through federally funded programs are appropriate for the populations those programs serve," the department said.
However, The Washington Post reported late Wednesday that ordering was opening. An unnamed source told the Post that part of the reason the vaccine ordering was held up was a delay in finalizing the CDC's clinical guidance, which is written for health care professionals and public health officials. The guidance reportedly needed to be reviewed by an external expert.
Lingering questions
The Post also reported that CDC career officials had previously finished preparations for making the vaccines available. All Trump officials needed to do was essentially push a button to open ordering, sources said. Further, a spokesperson for the Minnesota Department of Health suggested to the Post that CDC leadership was behind the hold, saying the state had been told "that CDC leadership approval is needed before distribution of the vaccine can begin."