As Virgin Galactic nears christening the first of its next-generation spaceship designed to launch customers on suborbital flights, it still is missing a key component-a name.
The self-described "commercial spaceline," which was founded by British tycoon Richard Branson, has turned to the public to vote on what to call the new vehicle. The spaceplane will be a member of Virgin Galactic's Delta-class fleet, succeeding SpaceShipTwo, which carried Branson and 31 others on 12 short hops above the US-defined boundary between Earth and space.
"You can vote for one of four finalist names for a spaceship that will join Virgin Galactic's growing fleet and the next chapter in our journey to expand access to space," the company announced on its website on August 11. "Name a Virgin Galactic spaceship, shape a piece of spaceflight history."
Virgin Galactic completed structural assembly of "Delta-1," its first new spaceship, earlier this year and towed it from its assembly hangar to a test and launch hangar in Arizona. Like SpaceShipTwo, Delta spaceships are designed to fly with up to six people. The new spaceship has streamlined manufacturing and maintenance, supporting an increased flight rate. Delta-class ships may fly as many as eight space missions per month, 12 times what was possible with SpaceShipTwo, according to Virgin Galactic.
Horizon, Explorer, Ascend, Apeiron
Virgin Galactic plans to debut the Delta spaceship's livery, including its name, as its next milestone before delivering the first vehicle to Spaceport America in New Mexico, where flight tests will begin.
"Our first ship is now expected to enter commercial service in February 2027," said Michael Colglazier, Virgin Galactic CEO, in a statement released on August 12). "We expect to commence the flight test phase with this vehicle in October, with our second spaceship planned to join the fleet in March."
Recently, Virgin Galactic teammates and "Future Astronauts" (the title the company gives to its clients who have reserved seats) were asked to submit their ideas for a name. Out of the 276 submissions, four were chosen for the vote: