San Diego Comic-Con has kicked off strong, and we've got a couple of new trailers to show for it: the final trailer for Coyote vs. Acme, and the full trailer for director Zach Cregger's fresh take on Resident Evil. Some lucky folks were also treated to a screening of Resident Evil's first 18 minutes.
Coyote vs. Acme
We were thrilled when the first trailer for Coyote vs. Acme dropped in April. The film had been shelved for years and is finally getting the broad theatrical release it deserves thanks to Ketchup Entertainment, which acquired it from Warner Bros. The concept alone is sheer brilliance: Wile E. Coyote, after decades of ACME equipment failing him in his efforts to catch that darned Road Runner, decides to sue the corporation. It's based on a well-known satirical piece by Ian Frazier (also titled "Coyote vs. Acme") published in The New Yorker in 1990.
Per the official premise:
After decades of being blown to bits by bombs, demolished by dynamite, mangled by magnets, battered by boulders, trampled by trains, tricked by tunnels, sprung by springs, steamrolled by steamrollers, maligned by misfires, bedeviled by bungees, rattled by rockets, backstabbed by bat suits, rocked by rocket skates, upended by unicycles, quaked by quake pills, rubberized by rogue bands, and hurled headlong off every cliff in the Southwest, Wile E. Coyote (Genius) finally fights back. Teaming up with billboard accident lawyer Kevin Avery (Will Forte), he takes on slick corporate counsel Buddy Crane (John Cena) and ACME, Inc., the profit-obsessed conglomerate behind every one of the Coyote's chaotic catastrophes.
In addition to Forte and Cena, the cast includes Lana Condor as Kevin's niece, Paige Avery; P.J. Byrne as ACME lawyer Bill Pellicano; and Luis Guzman as the judge presiding over the trial. Director Dave Green even tapped longtime voice actor Eric Bauza-a longtime fixture for Looney Tunes-to voice several classic characters, including Tweety Bird, Daffy Duck, Bugs Bunny, and Foghorn Leghorn.
We loved the first trailer, and the second is even funnier. There's not a ton of new footage, but we get Porky Pig showing up for a "pants-less modeling" audition, and Cena's slick lawyer interrogating Tweety Bird ("I don't pay you to 'tink you taw,' I pay you to 'taw'"). Good trailers don't automatically translate into good movies, but it's still hard to believe that Warner Bros. shelved this movie as a tax write-off.