Anti-vaccine Health Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr. has made it one of his top priorities to convince Americans to "eat real food," including more fresh fruits and vegetables. But, it's a hard sell when those real foods are causing real eruptions of explosive diarrhea across the country.
The Food and Drug Administration is investigating six outbreaks of foodborne diarrheal illnesses caused by Cyclospora, a unicellular parasite known for spreading from human feces onto fresh produce. Past outbreaks have been linked to leafy greens, fresh basil, fresh cilantro, snow peas, green onions, and raspberries. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has tallied a record high of over 11,500 confirmed and probable cases across 41 states, with over 300 requiring hospitalization. And that case total is almost certainly an undercount.
The largest of the outbreaks is linked to Taylor Farms' iceberg lettuce that was sold at Taco Bell restaurants and many other companies. The outbreak has sickened thousands of people across nine states, up from five states identified last week. One of the affected states is Michigan, which alone has reported 9,253 cases as of July 27. The other five outbreaks have no identified source.
Given the situation, it's no surprise that a CBS News poll over the weekend found that about 40 percent of Americans are now buying or eating less produce amid the outbreak. Only 4 percent reported they were following Kennedy's guidance of eating more.
The finding appears to be a setback to Kennedy's Make America Healthy Again agenda, which has typically focused on overhauling nutrition guidance while neglecting food safety and infectious diseases.
Under Kennedy's leadership, the FDA and CDC have both suffered draconian budget cuts and been drained of experienced career staff who know best how to identify, respond to, and effectively inform the public about such outbreaks. The CDC has lost about 25 percent of its staff, while FDA is down about 20 percent, CBS has reported.