Sellafield teams empty some of our oldest tanks
Tanks in Sellafield Ltd's Highly Active Liquor Evaporation and Storage (HALES) that had stored liquor for decades are now empty.
We have completed the bulk removal of one of our oldest legacy inventories, helping reduce risk and prepare the facility for the future.
The radioactive material, known as BUTEX liquor, was created as a byproduct during our first reprocessing operations in the 1950s. It had remained in the oldest tanks of our Highly Active Liquor Evaporation and Storage (HALES) plant for decades.
The original plans were always to hold the liquor in the tanks until the end of operations in the facility. There were additional issues around finding somewhere new for it to be stored on the busy site.
In total, around 110m3 of liquor needed to be moved.
To move the liquor, we had to first ensure the plant systems were up to the job.
The oldest tanks had not seen a transfer in almost 20 years. So, there were concerns that the systems needed for the transfer would no longer work.
Teams from operations, engineering and safety case worked together to find a safe and practical solution:
The ventilation system was updated, the work carefully planned, and the required permissions secured through engagement with the Office for Nuclear Regulation and the Environment Agency.
The HALES team started by using valves and controls to move a small amount of liquor from old tanks into the new ones. What they learned from this was used to improve methods, refine controls and prepare for larger-scale operations.
Once ready for the big job, the team knew it would take 2,250 operating cycles, transferring 40 litres at a time.
In the end it took months to complete work that was expected to take over a year.
Shift teams delivered the programme. They worked to clear targets, solved problems as they arose and kept the programme moving forward.
By removing this self-heating liquor from the oldest tanks, the team has reduced the heat load on some of HALES' oldest assets.
The next step for the liquid will be vitrification - when it is mixed with glass for safer long-term storage. The liquid will now be safely stored in the new tanks until this can happen.
Chris Bone, HALES head of operations, said:
A few years ago, there was real uncertainty about whether this could be done. The team's willingness to think differently and work through those challenges made this success possible.
I'd like to thank everyone who played a part in this achievement. The work was carried out alongside day-to-day operational demands, and the commitment shown by our teams has been outstanding. This success belongs to all those who contributed their time, expertise and determination to get the job done safely.