On 16 September, the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority (NDA) brought senior leaders from across the nuclear sector together in Manchester to galvanise action on the Nuclear Regulatory Taskforce (NRTF) review recommendations, unlocking a golden age of nuclear.
Leaders discussed how they'll collectively accelerate delivery of the review's recommendations, capitalising on a once-in-a generation opportunity to realise the sector's full potential.
The Review was commissioned by the government, led by economist John Fingleton, to look at how to modernise and strengthen the UK's nuclear regulatory system with the ultimate aim of delivering faster and cheaper progress through a more proportionate approach to risk and accelerating delivery.
Senior representatives in attendance spanned across the nuclear lifecycle, from defence, decommissioning, new build, government, regulators and the supply chain.
David Peattie, NDA Group CEO and host of the event, said:
The NDA group is committed to driving forward the reforms set out through the Nuclear Regulatory Taskforce and working with partners across the sector to deliver the step change the government is calling for.
This is a significant opportunity to modernise the way we deliver our mission, reducing the lifetime cost of decommissioning and securing greater value from public investment, while maintaining the highest standards of safety, security and environmental protection.
These discussions mark an important step in building the cultural shift needed to accelerate delivery of the Taskforce's recommendations, helping unlock economic growth, support reindustrialisation and create skilled jobs across communities throughout the UK.
There were speakers from across the NDA group, government, Rolls Royce SMR, EDF, Office for Nuclear Regulation and the Environment Agency, and a roundtable session in which attendees discussed the conditions that will enable change,
The review has attracted significant support from the Government, and the Chancellor specifically, in recognition of the huge benefits reforms have potential to deliver.
Recommendations centre around two broad objectives. Firstly, to reinvigorate the sector through more proportionate, risk-based decision-making and simplifying complex regulatory structures to enable faster, clearer decision-making and strengthen accountability.
Secondly to streamline planning and environmental assessments, reducing duplication and increasing proportionality to avoid programmes being delayed by unnecessary bureaucracy, while still maintaining the highest standards of safety, security and environmental protection.
The NDA is the organisation tasked by government with cleaning up the UK's former nuclear sites - one of the most complex challenges faced by the sector.
In a recent response to the Chancellor regarding the review, the NDA group outlined a number of immediate and longer-term actions it intends to take to implement the recommendations including:
- Improving Timely and Cost-Effective Delivery - risk-informed regulation aligned to actual hazards, streamlined safety arrangements, digital transformation, and more effective use of the supply chain.
- Process and System Reform - simplifying governance and removing duplication, stronger strategic planning oversight and risk-balanced portfolio management, freeing up resources to focus on mission delivery and improve organisational effectiveness.
- Responding to Cultural Issues Identified by the Review - strengthening leadership culture to encourage greater accountability, constructive challenge, innovation and proportionate decision-making.
- Commercial and Contractual Reform - better aligning incentives with timely and efficient mission delivery outcomes, placing greater emphasis on performance, innovation, collaboration and delivery against agreed outcomes.
You can read the NDA's full response to the Chancellor here: NDA Group response to the Chancellor of the Exchequer regarding implementation of the Nuclear Regulatory Taskforce Review - GOV.UK