A small for-profit social housing landlord has failed to meet the Regulator of Social Housing's Governance and Financial Viability Standard in regulatory judgements published today (9 September 2026).
Keystage CIC informed RSH in December 2025 about significant liquidity issues, and it was added to RSH's gradings under review list. RSH's investigation found weaknesses in the way Keystone managed its financial risks and business planning. Keystage CIC has been working constructively with RSH during this time to protect tenants, homes and services.
As a result of these issues, Keystage CIC has appointed an interim Chief Executive and Finance Director and has already made progress in addressing its financial challenges. This includes making plans to become a subsidiary of another social landlord through a merger. RSH will continue its intensive engagement until Keystage CIC addresses its issues.
The Luton-based landlord owns and manages 34 supported housing and 14 affordable general needs social homes. It also has a portfolio of 196 non-social homes across 27 leased properties.
Kate Dodsworth, RSH's Deputy Chief Executive, said:
"The issues we identified in this case demonstrate why financial resilience is essential. Landlords must have robust plans, controls and oversight in place to manage risks and ensure tenants' homes and services are protected.
"Meeting all regulatory standards is fundamental to maintaining a strong and sustainable sector that can support investment in existing homes and the delivery of more and better social homes."
RSH also published regulatory judgements for Melton Borough Council (Melton BC) and Look Ahead Care and Support Limited (Look Ahead) today.
Leicestershire-based Melton BC had received a consumer regulation C2 grade in August 2024, but has now been upgraded to C1, having evidenced to RSH that it is now delivering the outcomes of the Neighbourhood and Community Standard, and the Transparency, Influence and Accountability Standard.
The local authority has demonstrated that it identifies when issues occur and puts plans in place to remedy and minimise recurrence.
Today's regulatory judgement for Look Ahead confirms a first consumer grade of C2, a governance grade of G2 and a financial viability grade of V2. The landlord owns and manages around 1,100 social homes, and manages around 700 social homes that are owned by other landlords in London and the South East.
RSH found that Look Ahead needs to improve health and safety compliance oversight, particularly around meeting legal timescales for addressing hazards such as damp and mould.
The landlord also needs to improve some aspects of its governance arrangements to support continued compliance, specifically in relation to risk management and oversight of landlord health and safety.
ENDS
Notes to editors
The full list of judgements published today is provided in the table below.
-
On 1 April 2024 RSH introduced revised consumer standards for social housing landlords, designed to drive long-term improvements in the sector. It also began a programme of landlord inspections. The changes are a result of the Social Housing Regulation Act 2023 and include stronger powers to hold landlords to account. More information about RSH's approach is available in its document Reshaping Consumer Regulation.
-
RSH does not give grades to small landlords (under 1,000 homes) and only publishes regulatory judgements where it considers there to be serious weaknesses or failings in a landlord's delivery of the outcomes of the standards.
-
More information about RSH's responsive engagement, programmed inspections and consumer gradings is also available on its website.
-
RSH promotes a viable, efficient and well-governed social housing sector able to deliver more and better social homes. It does this by setting standards and carrying out robust regulation focusing on driving improvement in social landlords, including local authorities, and ensuring that housing associations are well-governed, financially viable and offer value for money. It takes appropriate action if the outcomes of the standards are not being delivered.
-
RSH publishes gradings for consumer, governance and viability. Local authorities only receive consumer gradings. More information can be found on our How we approach regulatory judgements and gradings page.
-
For media enquiries please contact vicky.moore@rsh.gov.uk or christian.cosby@rsh.gov.uk. For other enquiries email enquiries@rsh.gov.uk.