RAF Marham runway repairs strengthen operational resilience
Essential runway repairs at the Station have improved airfield resilience while maintaining support for Lightning Force operations.
Essential resurfacing work has been completed at RAF Marham, helping to maintain a safe and resilient airfield in support of Lightning Force operations.
The £3.5 million project covered an area of 28,000m2 of the runway intersection, which was last resurfaced in 2018. The project also addressed deterioration below the surface, with just over 4,000m2 of the underlying pavement requiring repair before the new surface could be laid. Finally, the team resurfaced a further 675m2 on Runway 05.
The location of the repairs at the runway intersection meant that all runways were unavailable. To maintain Lightning Force operations, a taxiway was used instead with contractor movements carefully coordinated with Air Traffic Control and the Airfield Manager to minimise disruption to wider airfield activity.
The work was carried out by VIVO and sub-contractor Allied with four different specialist sub-contractors. Including preparatory work, the project was completed in just five weeks, three weeks ahead of the original eight-week programme.
The project represented a £3.5 million investment in RAF Marham's airfield infrastructure. The team also delivered a £3.8 million saving by adopting an alternative approach that removed the need for an on-site concrete batching plant.
Tim Fenton, DIO's Project Delivery Manager, said:
Completing these essential repairs is an important investment in the resilience of RAF Marham's airfield infrastructure. By working closely with the Station and our delivery partners, we were able to tackle the immediate deterioration while also taking the opportunity to address additional requirements as part of the same programme of work. This has reduced the need for future intervention and helped ensure the airfield can continue to support Lightning Force operations.
Flt Lt Steve Southward, SO3 Sustain & Regional Delivery Desk Officer, RAF Central Region (South), said:
Through proactive collaboration between RAF Marham, DIO, VIVO and Air Infrastructure, we were able to extend the scope of the project to deal with additional required repairs.
By doing so while contractors were already mobilised, the team reduced future maintenance liabilities, avoided the cost and disruption of a separate project, and enhanced the resilience of critical airfield infrastructure that underpins Defence output and operational capability.
It is a strong example of the benefits achieved when the Station, DIO, industry partners and Air Infrastructure work together to rapidly resolve issues and optimise infrastructure investment.