Stephen Dimmick and Rhodri Lewis have been appointed for four year terms, commencing on 1 September 2026 to 31 August 2030.
Stephen Dimmick
Stephen Dimmick is a commercial leader and non-executive director with experience across the private, public and charitable sectors in Wales. He is Chair of Literature Wales, Interim CEO of The Aloud Charity, and serves on a number of boards and governance committees, including Monmouthshire Housing Association and the Office of the Future Generations Commissioner for Wales.
He founded and led doopoll, a digital audience engagement and market research platform, until its sale in 2022. He now supports cultural and public organisations to strengthen governance, commercial development, digital engagement and audience growth.
Rhodri Lewis
Rhodri Lewis is a qualified solicitor with more than 20 years' experience in legal and commercial roles across the sports sector. Having worked in London, Asia and Switzerland, he has held positions with governing bodies in both football and rugby union. He is currently Head of Sport at Carbon Law Partners in Cardiff.
Rhodri also serves as a Trustee of the Geraint Thomas Cycling Trust and is a member of the Urdd's Sports and Apprenticeships Board, alongside his work promoting diversity and inclusion within the legal profession.
Remuneration and Governance Code
Members of the S4C Board are remunerated at £9,650 per annum.
These appointments have been made in accordance with the Governance Code on Public Appointments. The appointments process is regulated by the Commissioner for Public Appointments.
Under the Code, any significant political activity undertaken by an appointee in the last five years must be declared. This is defined as including holding office, public speaking, making a recordable donation, or candidature for election.
Stephen Dimmick and Rhodri Lewis have declared no such political activity.
Notes to Editors
DCMS has around 400 regulated Public Appointment roles across 42 Public Bodies including Arts Council England, Theatres Trust, the National Gallery, UK Sport and the Gambling Commission. We encourage applications from talented individuals from all backgrounds and across the whole of the United Kingdom. To find out more about Public Appointments or to apply visit the HM Government Public Appointments Website.