This latest evidence brings together the most up-to-date research, data and examples of effective of targeted prevention and diversion activity from across England and Wales. The publication aims to improve understanding of what works to prevent offending and support greater use of effective prevention and diversion approaches.
The timing of the pack coincides with the new Government's ambitions to intervene much earlier and aligns with Andy Burnham's commitment in his first speech as Prime Minister of "building a more preventative state".
The pack highlights the importance of ensuring diversion considers the needs and safety of victims and public protection, alongside those of the child, while identifying opportunities to strengthen consistency and restorative approaches.
Key findings from the evidence review include:
-
In the year ending December 2025, 43% of recorded outcomes involving a youth justice service (YJS) were diversionary, meaning they did not result in a caution or court sentence.
-
In 2025, around 13,300 children were cautioned or sentenced, representing a 65% decrease since 2015.
-
In the year ending December 2024, first-time entrants fell to 8,110, a 4% decrease from 2023 and the lowest level since 2014.
-
White children (53%) were almost twice as likely as Black children (27%) to receive a diversionary outcome.
-
Younger children aged 10-14 (66%) and girls (65%) were more likely to receive diversionary outcomes than older children aged 15-17 (39%) and boys (44%).
-
There is significant geographic variation in diversionary outcomes, ranging from 63% in Wales and 58% in the East Midlands to 36% in the West Midlands and 17% in London.
Continuing progress
Almost half of recorded outcomes involving a YJS ended without a caution or court sentence in 2025, while cautions and court sentences have fallen by 65% since 2015. This suggests that more children are being diverted away from formal justice processes and towards support that addresses the factors driving offending behaviour.
Recent clarification from the National Police Chiefs' Council has further reinforced the legitimacy of diversion within national policing frameworks. Police outcomes will now be categorised as Solved, Resolved and Unresolved, with diversionary activity recognised within the Resolved category and performance focus placed on reducing unresolved outcomes.
The evidence highlights that challenges do remain with continuing ethnic disparities in access to diversion interventions. Black and ethnic minority children remain less likely to receive diversionary outcomes, while substantial variation between areas suggests differences in local policies, practice and service provision. Greater consistency in decision-making and partnership working is needed to ensure every child receives the right support at the right time.
Stephanie Roberts-Bibby, Chief Executive of the Youth Justice Board, said:
The evidence is indisputable and diverting children away from the formal criminal justice system and into targeted support is the most effective way to reduce reoffending, prevent the lasting harm that can come from early contact with the justice system, and create safer communities.
Through our close partnership with the Ministry of Justice and the Youth Endowment Fund, we continually strengthen our understanding of what works and how it can be delivered consistently. By translating the best available evidence into practical guidance for frontline professionals, we can help embed effective diversion approaches across England and Wales, improving outcomes for children, supporting victims, and strengthening communities.
Access the Targeted Prevention and Diversion: Evidence Pack
Ends
Youth Justice Board media enquiries
Youth Justice Board for England and Wales
3A, 3rd Floor
10 South Colonnade
Canary Wharf
London
E14 4PU
Email comms@yjb.gov.uk
For out-of-hours press queries 0300 790 0711