A new rolling review of the UK maritime syllabus has been launched, led by the Maritime and Coastguard Agency (MCA) in partnership with industry, to ensure high-quality training that is fit for the future.
Backing has been secured for five-yearly revisions of the UK syllabus that training centres must teach students to learn up-to-date skills for safe and successful employment at sea.
Future changes to the syllabus, which has been taught in a newly revised version since September 2025, will be reflected in the recently launched electronic Training Record Books (eTRBs) and digital assessments.
Updates to the training syllabus will include new technology, enhanced safety standards and improved practice.
The development springs from the MCA-led Cadet Training and Modernisation (CT&M) Programme which brings together key stakeholders focused on improving seafarer training. The five-year review was backed by the CT&M Programme's Oversight Committee which sets the strategic direction of the programme and reports to the Maritime Minister.
The CT&M Programme's syllabus sub-group, which meets every three months to review modules, has been also expanded to include more shipping companies, training providers and industry representation bodies.
The next syllabus update is scheduled to be taught from 2030 following the new edition being delivered to training centres in 2029.
The CT&M Programme was launched in 2021 to keep learning in line with modern technology and practices.
MCA Chief Examiner Ajit Jacob said:
Seafarers are the lifeblood of the UK's maritime economy, so it is critical we ensure they are equipped with the skills to work safely and successfully.
Reviewing the syllabus every five years means we can move with the times - keeping up with the accelerating changes in vessel technology and quickly learning vital safety lessons to keep our crews from harm and protect the environment.
Merchant Navy Training Board (MNTB) Director Kevin Gregory said:
At the heart of every safe and successful voyage are seafarers trained to the highest standards - but as vessel technologies, alternative fuels and safety, environmental and regulatory requirements evolve, the skills needed at sea are changing quickly.
This collaborative review process will be an important step in ensuring UK seafarer training keeps pace with the realities of modern shipping.
By working together across industry, training providers, unions and the regulator, we can keep the syllabus relevant, practical and ambitious - supporting seafarers into successful careers and maintaining the UK's reputation for world-class maritime training.
Background
The CT&M Programme is based on recommendations made by the Seafarer and Cadet Training Review, launched by the Maritime Skills Commission on the instruction of the Maritime Minister in 2021.
It brought together key stakeholders, including the MNTB, nautical colleges, unions and more, focused on improving seafarer training. It is believed to be the first time a maritime regulator has joined forces with industry experts to shape such training in this way.
The MCA does not deliver training but is responsible for overseeing that standards are maintained by providers through seafarer assessments and regular audits of the training providers.