- The Belfast group of companies employs 50 highly skilled staff and supports a wider network of 85 UK-based suppliers
- Announcement takes place ahead of UKEF's Northern Ireland Business Forum on 6 October
CATAGEN, a Northern Irish firm specialising in technologies to cut carbon and other emissions, has secured commercial funding backed by a guarantee from UK Export Finance (UKEF), the government's export credit agency.
The financing will enable the Titanic-Quarter-based business to build on the momentum of its subsidiary, ClimaHtech Green Flight, which produces sustainable aviation fuel (SAF). SAF is a lower carbon alternative to conventional jet fuel, made from more sustainable sources than fossil fuels.
CATAGEN is also continuing to expand its capacity through CATAGEN Green Emissions Testing, providing testing services that measure and help vehicle and other manufacturers to meet stringent emissions standards globally.
Minister for Trade Anas Sarwar said:
CATAGEN is exactly the kind of innovative business this Government wants to back to expand as we look to drive growth in every postcode.
Businesses like this are pivotal to our modern Industrial Strategy, supporting high-skilled jobs and helping make the UK a leader in clean energy and aviation.
Minister for Northern Ireland Sarah Owen said:
This support from the UK Government is not only backing Catagen as a great business, but also Northern Ireland's skilled workforce, helping the region remain at the cutting-edge of sustainable aviation and technology.
This government-backed financing will encourage further innovation in clean energy and shows the UK government's commitment to supporting Northern Ireland's economy.
Founded by Dr Andrew Woods, a PhD in Mechanical Engineering from Queen's University Belfast, CATAGEN has a team of highly skilled multidisciplinary staff and works with a wider ecosystem of NI and UK-based supply chain. Its partners span the UK, Europe and the US - including ROUSH, Zenvo, Ducati, Ryanair, Shell Aviation Ireland, Vinci Airports and LoganAir.
Clean growth and sustainable aviation sit at the heart of the government's industrial strategy for UK manufacturing and exports. CATAGEN's work to invent and produce the technologies for lower-carbon aviation fuel is a practical example of that ambition in action.
CATAGEN's Green Flight technology helps produce sustainable aviation fuel with very low carbon emissions using an innovative approach: small, modular production units that can be deployed in different locations and can be scaled up as demand grows.
Lauren Dougherty, Export Finance Manager for Northern Ireland at UK Export Finance, said:
CATAGEN is turning world-class Northern Irish innovation into modular technology that can be sold around the globe. UKEF's backing will help the company move into commercial production, reach more overseas customers and support skilled jobs and suppliers right here in Northern Ireland.
Businesses keen to follow Catagen's example can join us at UKEF's Northern Ireland Business Forum in Belfast on 6 October. The event will bring together exporters, finance specialists and government experts to explain the support available, help businesses manage the risks of trading overseas and share practical advice on growing internationally.
Dr Andrew Woods, CEO and Founder of CATAGEN, said:
The backing from UKEF has been instrumental in bridging the gap between late-stage product development and commercialisation. It has enabled us to accelerate our SAF technology towards market, further strengthen CATAGEN's intellectual property fortress and strengthen the foundations for further international growth.
This economic opportunity is significant. The global SAF market is expected to scale dramatically as aviation works to meet its decarbonisation targets, creating an opportunity for CATAGEN to export home grown technology into a rapidly growing global market.
This announcement comes ahead of UKEF's Northern Ireland Business Forum in Belfast on 6 October. The free half-day conference will show Northern Irish businesses how government-backed finance and insurance can help them manage risk, win overseas business and grow in global markets.
The support also forms part of UKEF's wider commitment to help UK businesses benefit from the global shift to a low-carbon economy. UKEF aims to support at least £10 billion of clean-growth business between 2024 and 2029. It is also working towards interim targets to cut emissions linked to its oil and gas, power and aviation financing, on the path to net zero financed emissions by 2050.
Businesses like CATAGEN are central to UKEF's plan to boost UK exports. Over the last financial year, UKEF provided over £11 billion in loans, guarantees and insurance to help UK companies export and grow, supporting up to 85,000 jobs and contributing up to £6.4 billion to the economy.