PackUK, on behalf of the four UK nations, is introducing a resubmission deadline of 1 September 2026. This applies to 2025 packaging data submissions from producers who pay pEPR fees.
The 1 September deadline gives producers a five-month window, from the 1 April reporting deadline, to correct any errors and resubmit packaging data. This will enable fees and Notices of Liability to be published later this year, without further recalculations or changes expected.
What this means for fees and Notices of Liability
After the 1 September deadline, the regulators will continue to undertake compliance monitoring. PackUK will then use this data to publish confirmed producer fees for 26/27 and issue Notices of Liability, later this calendar year. After 1 September, any further producer data resubmissions will not affect Notices of Liability or disposal fees.
PackUK published illustrative fees for Year 2 in December 2025. These are subject to change based on final data resubmissions, but PackUK does not intend to publish further illustrative fees. The fees published later this year will be confirmed figures for Year 2 of the scheme and used to calculate Notices of Liability.
As in Year 1, producers will have 50 calendar days to pay, with the option to pay in instalments.
What producers who pay pEPR fees need to do
The most important action producers can take right now is to resubmit their 2025 packaging data by 1 September 2026 if corrections are needed.
If producers report through Compliance Schemes, we advise they contact them to confirm what they need to provide and by when.
After 1 September, any further producer data resubmissions will not affect Notices of Liability or disposal fees.
Producers, however, must continue to resubmit their data after this date, to ensure it is as accurate as reasonably possible for their recycling obligations.
Why PackUK is making this change
As communicated earlier this year, PackUK is taking steps to improve data stability and reduce in-year fee variability so businesses can plan with greater confidence, whilst ensuring local authorities have certainty around their pEPR payments.
In future, this may include bringing further forward the deadline for producer data resubmissions to affect NoL calculations. This is part of a clear direction of travel to provide clarity on pEPR fees as early in the year as possible.
For further assistance, please contact the EPR Helpdesk:
Telephone: 0300 060 0002
Email: EPRCustomerService@defra.gov.uk