The Veterinary Medicines Directorate (VMD) has updated its guidance on the use of QR codes on authorised veterinary medicinal product packaging.
The changes will allow marketing authorisation holders (MAHs) to link QR codes on packaging to additional educational and instructional material, supporting product users with extra guidance.
What is changing
Our previous guidance permitted QR codes on packaging to only link to non-public-facing material, such as internal manufacturing information, or to the approved product text. However, now MAHs can link to additional educational and instructional content, provided it complies with new QR code principles published on the Product Literature Standards (PLS).
These updates are intended to improve digital access to product information for veterinary professionals and product users.
What this means for pet owners and vets
These changes will make it easier for pet owners to access clear, helpful information about the veterinary medicines they use.
You may start to see QR codes appearing on more veterinary medicine packaging. Scanning these codes with your smartphone may take you directly to educational and instructional content provided by pharmaceutical companies - such as guidance on how to administer the medicine correctly, what to expect during treatment, or how to store the product safely.
This information is in addition to the instructions already on the packaging and label. It is designed to help you feel confident using veterinary medicines correctly and safely, which matters for your animal's health and welfare.
Not all products will have QR codes on their packaging, as it is not a requirement, additionally, pharmaceutical companies may use QR codes for their own compliance and counterfeit contingencies rather than public-facing informative purposes.
Gavin Hall, Deputy CEO VMD said
Updating our QR code guidance provides the opportunity for additional digital educational and instructional material alongside the essential information already included on veterinary medicine packaging and in product leaflets. This supplementary content can give vets and pet owners convenient access to further guidance on the safe and effective use of medicines.
We are committed to working with industry to embrace digital innovation while maintaining the rigorous, risk-based standards that protect animal and public health.
Next steps
The new QR code principles are published on the PLS. If you have a question about the changes, please use our contact form.