Building on the successful Strategic Dialogues held in 2023 and 2025, both sides reaffirmed their commitment to advance the UK-Maldives partnership through regular, structured engagement. Discussions covered a broad range of bilateral, regional and global issues, reflecting the depth and breadth of cooperation between the two countries.
The UK and Maldives reiterated their shared commitment to promoting security, peace, stability and resilience in the Indian Ocean region. Discussions focused on defence cooperation, maritime security, counterterrorism and protective security. The UK reaffirmed its commitment to supporting capacity-building efforts of the Maldives through technical assistance, training and practical cooperation across policing, defence and maritime security.
Both sides reviewed consular cooperation and welcomed the close collaboration between their respective authorities in supporting citizens and addressing shared consular priorities.
The UK and Maldives exchanged views on governance, criminal justice reform, judicial independence, human rights and efforts to strengthen democratic institutions. The UK reiterated its support for Maldives' continued efforts to consolidate democratic governance, uphold human rights and strengthen the rule of law. Both sides welcomed continued dialogue on these shared values.
The two countries reviewed progress in economic and trade cooperation since the previous Strategic Dialogue and reaffirmed their commitment to strengthening bilateral economic ties. Maldives welcomed the UK's suspension of tariffs on tuna imports from 20 May 2026 until 31 December 2028. Both sides welcomed continued growth in trade and investment links and discussed opportunities to expand cooperation in fisheries, tourism, renewable energy and financial services.
The UK and Maldives reaffirmed the importance of education and human capital development as a key pillar of the bilateral relationship. Both sides welcomed the role of Chevening and Commonwealth Scholarships in strengthening people-to-people ties and agreed to explore opportunities to further expand cooperation in the field of education.
The two countries also welcomed the strong and growing links between their peoples. Noting that more than 200,000 visitors from the United Kingdom travelled to Maldives in 2025, both sides recognised the important contribution of tourism, cultural exchange and interpersonal connections to the bilateral relationship.
The UK and Maldives discussed ongoing cooperation on climate change, environmental protection and marine conservation. Building on collaboration under the Ocean Country Partnership Programme, both sides agreed to further cooperation on ocean governance, marine conservation and climate resilience. Opportunities for collaboration in advance of COP31 were discussed recognising the important leadership role of the Maldives among Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and within the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS).
The two sides exchanged views on regional developments and multilateral cooperation, including within the United Nations and the Commonwealth. They reaffirmed their commitment to working together to address global challenges, including those affecting SIDS.
The Dialogue was co-chaired by Laure Beaufils, Director for South Asia and Afghanistan at the UK Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, and by Dr Hala Hameed, Secretary, at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Maldives, with participation from senior officials from both governments. The Dialogue concluded with a shared commitment to continue annual Strategic Dialogues and to further strengthen the longstanding partnership between the United Kingdom and Maldives.