The Applicant made an application under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the Applicant.
21 July 2026
The Certification Office has published a new complaints procedure.
The revised procedure provides clearer information about what can be complained about, how complaints can be made, how they will be handled and the outcomes that may be available. It also includes information about accessibility, reasonable adjustments, privacy and how we learn from complaints.
The new procedure supports the Certification Officer's objective of strengthening transparency, data and insight by making the complaints process easier to understand, more accessible and more consistent for those who use our services.
The Applicant made two complaints of breaches of rules relating to disciplinary proceedings by the Union. The application was under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
Following a hearing held by Video Conference on 27 May 2026, the Certification Officer did not uphold the complaints.
3 July 2026
An application for a certificate of independence from Union Workers Union was received by the Certification Officer on 8 June 2026.
The Annual Report of the Certification Officer, Stephen Hardy, was laid before Parliament on 3 July 2026. The report describes the work of the Certification Officer over the period 1 April 2025 to 31 March 2026 and provides detailed information on all trade unions and employers' associations. The statistical information it contains is drawn from the annual returns received during the reporting period, which relate mainly to the year ending 31 December 2024.
1 July 2026
Women's Rugby Association was removed from the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 1 July 2026 because the organisation had dissolved.
23 June 2026
British Association of Dental Nurses merged into Community on 23 June 2026. Therefore, British Association of Dental Nurses ceased to exist from 23 June 2026 and has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer.
Trade Union for Ethnic Minority Social Workers (TUEMSW) was removed from the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 23 June 2026 because the organisation had dissolved.
16 June 2026
An application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from Equality for Workers Union (EFWU). The application has been entered on the Certification Officer's record of applications for certificates of independence, which is available on request by contacting info@certoffice.org.
The Certification Officer will not determine the application until at least one calendar month has elapsed from the date of this notice.
Any person wishing to submit information relevant to the application may do so by contacting info@certoffice.org.
2 June 2026
The Certification Officer is launching a new online service to modernise casework
The CO is taking a significant step towards a more modern, digital service, in line with the commitments he set out in the Business Plan 2026.
From 8 June 2026, applicants will be able to submit applications online in relation to alleged breaches of trade union rules and the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. This new service will replace the existing paper-based process of downloading, completing and submitting PDF forms by email.
The introduction of the online form marks the first phase of a wider programme to modernise the CO's systems and services. The new approach is intended to improve the efficiency, consistency and accessibility of casework, while supporting better use of data and insight.
27 May 2026
An application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from Workers Voice Union. The application has been entered on the Certification Officer's record of applications for certificates of independence, which is available on request by contacting info@certoffice.org.
The Certification Officer will not determine the application until at least one calendar month has elapsed from the date of this notice.
Any person wishing to submit information relevant to the application may do so by contacting info@certoffice.org.
Mr Barnes and Mr Dench made two complaints of breaches of union rules relating to the 2025 national President and Treasurer elections. The application was under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
Following a hearing which took by Video Conference, on 29 April 2026, the Certification Officer did not uphold the complaints.
Mr Rawlins made a complaint that the union had breached its rules as a result of the system to elect divisional representatives to the Union's Representative Body. The application was under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
Following a hearing, which took place by Video Conference on 30 March 2026, the Assistant Certification Officer did not uphold the complaint.
Mr Chester made an application under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by Mr Chester.
15 May 2026
The application for a certificate of independence from Union of Pilots, Engineers & Cabin Crew (UPECC) was approved by the Assistant Certification Officer on 15 May 2026.
8 May 2026
An application to register the Instrument of Transfer of British Association of Dental Nurses to Community was received by the Certification Officer on 8 May 2026.
1 May 2026
Business Plan 2026 to 2027
The Certification Officer has published his Business Plan for 2026 to 2027, setting out how the office will deliver its statutory responsibilities, support good governance, and strengthen transparency as the Employment Rights Act 2025 is implemented.
Stephen Hardy, the CO, said:
This Business Plan sets out how the Certification Office will return fully to its traditional statutory role, while modernising the way we work and strengthening transparency for those we regulate and serve. Our focus for 2026 to 2027 is on delivering fair, efficient and accessible regulation that supports confidence in trade union and employers' association governance.
For further information or to share views on our priorities, please contact:
An application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from Union of Pilots, Engineers & Cabin Crew (UPECC). Any person who wishes to submit any information relevant to this application should do so within one calendar month of the date of this notice.
Mr Nesbitt made nine complaints of breaches of union rules regarding the 2025 General Secretary election. The application was under section 108A(1) of the the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
Following a hearing which took by Video Conference, on 17 March 2026, the Certification Officer did not uphold any of the complaints.
The applicants made seven complaints under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the Union had breached rules relating to the appointment or election of a person to an office of the Union.
Following a hearing on 10 February and 3 March 2026, the Certification Officer refused six of the complaints. He upheld, in part, one complaint but declined to make an enforcement order.
Dr Farwell made seven complaints of breaches of union rules regarding the 2023 branch elections at the Solent branch of the Union. The application was under section 108A(1) of the the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
Following a hearing which took place over 3 days, by Video Conference, on 3 December 2025, 28 January 2026 and 4 March 2026, the Certification Officer did not uphold any of the complaints.
30 March 2026
Certification Officer marks 50 years of independent oversight
The Certification Officer (CO) has marked the 50th anniversary of the establishment of the office with a speech reflecting on its origins, its evolution, and its continuing role in promoting good industrial relations and effective governance in the UK.
Established in 1976, the Certification Officer is the independent statutory regulator of trade unions and employer associations, with duties that have developed across five decades of significant political, social and economic change. In his anniversary address, the Certification Officer reflected on that journey, beginning with the context in which Parliament first considered the role in 1975.
The CO, Stephen Hardy, said:
"When the Certification Officer (CO) was first being considered in 1975:
Harold Wilson was Prime Minister;
Vic Feather was General Secretary of the TUC;
Sir Ralph Bateman was President of the CBI;
The UK's car of choice was the Ford Cortina;
'Jaws' the blockbuster film had just been released;
The UK won the Eurovision Song Contest;
And, the Sex Discrimination and Equal Pay Acts were coming into force.
However, the world was in turmoil, as the Vietnam War had just ended with the fall of Saigon and in Britain an economic crisis was looming.
But, notwithstanding this gloomy background, the then Employment Minister, Michael Foot, called an informal meeting with Vic Feather and General Secretaries Jack Jones, Hugh Scanlon and Len Murray. The agenda was to discuss the creation of the Certification Office, an independent office to improve industrial relations, as part of the 'social contract' between the Government and trade unions.
In fact, introducing the Employment Protection Bill in Parliament to create the Certification Officer on Wednesday 29 October 1975, Albert Booth, the then MP for Barrow in Furness and Minister of State for Employment, described the Certification Officer as a 'truly independent office holder who will bring truth to the issues at hand'.
Yet, by the time John Edwards was appointed as the first Certification Officer on 12 March 1976, Harold Wilson had resigned as Prime Minister and had been replaced by Jim Callaghan; Concorde had made its maiden flight; that Summer saw a UK heat wave for 15 days; and, the play - Macbeth - had opened at the Royal Shakespeare Company with two unknown, up and coming young actors, Judi Dench and Ian McKellen.
How times change and decades swiftly pass by.
Since the inception of the Certification Officer, there has been 12 general elections; 12 Prime Ministers to-date; and, 86 major employment law legislative measures.
Yet, against this background, over the last 5 decades, the CO has listed over 190 trade unions and 60 employer associations; collated Annual Returns every year for 5 decades, annually; and, determined in excess of 650 formal applications.
Such data, I am sure you will agree with me, reaffirms that the Certification Office has been robustly independent and effective throughout the last 5 decades as well as proven to be 'fit for purpose'.
To that end, the Certification Officer's small, but expert staff team have remained dedicated, diligent and focussed in their purpose. Working closely with Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS) over the last 5 decades and being subject to the valuable scrutiny of the Employment Appeal Tribunal, the Certification Officer has always strived to promote good industrial relations as a constant.
So, as we recognise and celebrate the service given by the Certification Officer over the last 50 years, there is no place for complacency and so, we look forward to the next half-century under the new legislative landscape set by the Employment Rights Act 2025.
For the Certification Officer and his office, the future brings challenges and changes. Such as life after the levy; the introduction of an online portal for the submission of Annual Returns from 2027; a new applications' sift; as well as revised guidance on the office and work of the Certification Officer. All of this alongside the financial investigations, annual returns, listing/de-listing and hearings we do, as our daily workload.
So, we sincerely hope that you will continue along our journey with us keeping, good industrial relations and effective governance, at the heart of all we do.
Thank you for your support in this remarkable journey over the last 50 years."
Notes
The office of the Certification Officer was created by the Employment Protection Act 1975 and began operating in March 1976.
The CO is an independent statutory office holder, responsible for regulating trade unions and employers' associations.
The CO's functions include maintaining lists of unions and employer associations, receiving and publishing annual returns, overseeing elections and ballots, handling complaints and investigations, and determining certain statutory applications.
The Certification Officer is supported by a small specialist team and, under statute, receives staff, facilities and support from Acas.
Mr Alsaid made two complaints of breaches of union rules regarding the 2025 branch elections at the South East branch of the Union. The application was under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
Following a hearing, which took place by Video Conference on 18 February 2026, the Certification Officer did not uphold the complaints.
The applicant made five complaints under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the Union had breached rules relating to election procedures in the BASSA branch of the Union.
Following a hearing on 20 January 2026 and written final submissions submitted by both parties, the Certification Officer refused complaints 1,3,4 and 5. He upheld complaint 2 and made an enforcement order.
Mr Giire made an application under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant.
12 February 2026
Guidance Update in Light of the Employment Rights Act 2025
The Employment Rights Act 2025 is scheduled to come into force on 18 February 2026. This legislation introduces a number of significant changes that directly affect the statutory functions and responsibilities of the Certification Officer.
As a result, substantial portions of the existing guidance are currently undergoing review to ensure alignment with the updated legal framework. Consequently, work to revise and update the guidance is actively in progress; but has not yet been completed.
During this period of transition, users should be aware that some existing guidance may not fully reflect the requirements introduced by the new legislation. In circumstances where any inconsistency or contradiction arises between the current published guidance and the Employment Rights Act 2025, the provisions of the legislation will take precedence.
Individuals and organisations are therefore advised to refer to the legislation as the authoritative source.
Further communications will be issued once the review has been finalised and updated guidance is available. We appreciate your understanding and cooperation during this period of change.
6 February 2026
Future Funding Arrangements - Repeal of the levy on 1 April 2026
The Employment Rights Act 2025 repeals the Certification Officer's power to raise an annual levy, meaning that the Certification Officer will return to his previous funding arrangements. The repeal of the levy did not come into effect immediately upon Royal Assent of the Act on 18 December 2025, instead, further regulations are required to remove the levy.
We have been advised by the Department for Business and Trade that the repeal of the levy will take place on 1 April 2026.
This means the final levy payment has now been collected and organisations on the Certification Officer's lists will no longer be required to make any further levy payments.
14 January 2026
Important Update: Changes to Political Fund Rules under the Employment Rights Act 2025
Trade unions wishing to operate a political fund after 17 February 2026 must update their political fund rules and obtain approval from the Certification Officer, following changes introduced by the Employment Rights Act 2025.
Key Changes
The previous opt-in system for political fund contributions is replaced with an opt-out system.
Transitional arrangements apply for members who joined between 1 March 2018 and 17 February 2026.
The Assistant Certification Officer found that Mr McDonald's application is not one which the Certification Officer has the jurisdiction to determine. Therefore, the application cannot be accepted for determination by the Certification Officer and is dismissed.
Mr Jama made two complaints of breaches of rules relating to the constitution or proceedings of a decision-making meeting by the Union. The application was made under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
Following a hearing held by Video Conference on 15 October 2025, the Assistant Certification Officer upheld the first complaint but did not consider that it was appropriate to make an enforcement order. He did not uphold the second complaint.
The applicant made a complaint that Unite the Union breached section 30(2) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 in failing to comply with her request to access accounting records of the union. Following consideration of the parties' written submissions, the Assistant Certification Officer upheld the complaint in that the union breached the requirement by failing to make arrangements within 28 days. He did not make an enforcement order as the union was actively seeking dates from the applicant to make practical arrangements for the inspection.
The Assistant Certification Officer found that Mr Rachubinski's application is not one which the Certification Officer has the jurisdiction to determine. Therefore, the application cannot be accepted for determination by the Certification Officer and is dismissed.
Mr Cortes made three complaints of a breaches of rules relating to disciplinary proceedings by the Union. The application was under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
Following a hearing held by Video Conference on 18 September 2025, the Certification Officer did not uphold the first two complaints. He partially upheld the third complaint but did not consider that it was appropriate to make an enforcement order.
2 October 2025
The Department of Business and Trade announced the appointment of Stephen Hardy as the new Certification Officer.
Stephen Hardy took up his role on 1 October 2025, replacing Sarah Bedwell, who had held the post since 2017.
Biography
Stephen Hardy is a Professor of Employment Law and formerly the Dean of the Faculty of Business, Law & Politics at the University of Hull (2020-2024).
He has over 3 decades experience in higher education and was a practising Barrister, specialising in Employment and Public law, instructed in complex trades union, equality, redundancy, dismissal and judicial review cases; including being appointed Regional Treasury Counsel and on the Panel of Preferred Counsel of the Equality Human Rights Commission.
Since 2011, he has been a Fee-paid Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal and was a member of the Judicial Pensions Board (2019-2023). He was a member of the Social Security Advisory Committee. In 2021 he was elected a Fellow of the Academy of Social Sciences and, since 2022, has been a Principal Fellow of the Higher Education Academy.
Fellica made a complaint under section 108A (1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the union breached several of its rules relating to removal from office, disciplinary proceedings by the union and the constitution or proceedings of a decision-making meeting.
The Certification Officer struck out the complaints under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that they had no reasonable prospect of success.
Please note that on 17 October 2025 this decision was revised to amend references to the preferred title and pronouns of the Applicant. For the avoidance of any doubt, this revised version does not change the reasoning nor outcome of the complaint. In any event, for completeness, the original version is appended to the attached decision to show that no changes other than title and pronouns have been made and/or to aid any interpretation where grammatical structure may be affected.
Mr Sartin made one complaint of a breach of a union rule and the principles of natural justice relating to disciplinary proceedings by the Union. The application was under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
Following a hearing held by Video Conference on 16 July 2025, the Certification Officer did not uphold the complaint.
11 August 2025
Cleaners Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 6 August 2025.
The applicant made a complaint that Unite the Union breached section 30(2) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 in failing to comply with his request to access accounting records of the union. The applicant submitted two complaints to the Certification Officer on 6 January 2025 and 7 March 2025 respectively. Following a hearing held by Video Conferencing on 19 June 2025, the Assistant Certification Officer upheld the applicant's complaints and made an enforcement order, granting the applicant access to the union's accounting records.
7 July 2025
The Annual Report of the Certification Officer, Sarah Bedwell, was laid before Parliament on 7 July 2025. The report describes the work of the Certification Officer over the period 1 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 and provides detailed information on all trade unions and employers' associations. The statistical information it contains is drawn from the annual returns received during the reporting period, which relate mainly to the year ending 31 December 2023.
29 May 2025
Care Workers Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 28 May 2025.
22 May 2025
Appointment of interim CO Announcement
I am very happy to announce that Michael Kidd has been appointed as Interim Certification Officer from 1 June 2025. Mike will lead the team until a permanent appointment has been made.
Many of you will know Mike from his role as Assistant Certification Officer. I would encourage all of our stakeholders to support Mike and the team in the coming months
29 April 2025
The application for a certificate of independence from United Medical Associate Professionals Trade Union (UMAPs TU) was approved by the Certification Officer on 29 April 2025
This decision relates to Mr Morley's application under section 108A (1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 received in March 2022 that the union had breached its rules in relation to his removal from membership. The Certification Officer informed Mr Morley, in April 2022, of her view that his complaint was not within her jurisdiction and the case was closed.
On appeal, the Employment Appeal Tribunal remitted the matter back to the Certification Officer to hear full argument. A hearing was held by the Assistant Certification Officer, who did not uphold the complaint on the basis that he had no jurisdiction to consider it.
15 April 2025
The application for a certificate of independence from Yourmate Union was approved by the Certification Officer on 15 April 2025.
28 March 2025
An application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from United Medical Associate Professionals Trade Union (UMAPs TU). Any person who wishes to submit any information relevant to this application should do so within one calendar month of the date of this notice.
13 March 2025
An application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from Yourmate Union. Any person who wishes to submit any information relevant to this application should do so within one calendar month of the date of this notice.
The FBU notified the Certification Officer that it had breached its obligations under section 55 in the recent general secretary election and asked the Certification Officer to make a declaration and an enforcement order.
The Certification Officer made a declaration that the Union breached the requirements of Chapter IV of Part 1 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992, because the Union did not issue ballot papers to all eligible members. She also made an enforcement order.
13 February 2025
Certification Officer - retirement
I will be retiring from my role as Certification Officer on 31 May 2025. I have enjoyed working with Trade Unions, Employers' Associations and their members and have been grateful for their willingness to engage with myself and my team.
I have been very lucky to work with a fabulous team who have supported me to develop and modernise the role of the Certification Office. Together we have strengthened our internal and external processes to deliver higher standards to our customers. I am confident that they can maintain these standards and work with our customers as our legislation changes. They will also continue to look for ways to improve our service and, in particular, to ensure that we deliver more efficient and accessible services online.
I informed the Secretary of State for Business and Trade of my retirement in December 2024. I expect the Department to begin recruitment for my successor very soon.
The Certification Officer received allegations of financial irregularities within the Fire Brigades Union on 12 July 2023. On 30 July 2024, following extensive enquiries with the Union, the Certification Officer appointed an inspector to investigate the allegations further. On 11 February 2025, the inspector submitted the report of his findings to the Certification Officer.
31 January 2025
Leek United Building Society Staff Association was removed from the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 29 January 2025 because the organisation had dissolved.
Mr Cassidy made a complaint under section 108A(2)(a) about breaches of union rules in relation to the appointment or election of a person to any office.
Following a hearing held by Video Conference on 16 December 2024, the Certification Officer did not uphold the complaint.
15 January 2025
Boots Pharmacists' Association (BPA) merged into PDA Union on 1 January 2025. Therefore Boots Pharmacists' Association (BPA) ceased to exist from 1 January 2025 and has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer.
Mr Cromwell made a complaint under 108A (1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the union breached its rule relating to disciplinary proceedings by the union (including expulsion)
The Certification Officer struck out the complaint under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the grounds that the complaint, as advanced by Mr Cromwell, had no reasonable prospect of success.
Ms Pinder made one complaint of a breach of a union rule relating to disciplinary proceedings by the Union. The application was under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
Following a hearing held by Video Conference on 30 October 2024, the Certification Officer did not uphold the complaint.
A part of the decision has been redacted because it refers to the personal information of an individual.
15 November 2024
An application to register the Instrument of Transfer of Boots Pharmacists' Association (BPA) to PDA Union was received by the Certification Officer on 15 November 2024.
Mr Embery made one complaint of a breach of a Union rule relating to disciplinary proceedings by the Union. The application was under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
Following a hearing held by Video Conference on 3 October 2024, the Certification Officer did not uphold the complaint on the basis that she had no jurisdiction to consider the application.
5 November 2024
The Annual Report of the Certification Officer, Sarah Bedwell, was laid before Parliament on 5 November 2024. The report describes the work of the Certification Officer over the period 1 April 2023 to 31 March 2024 and provides detailed information on all trade unions and employers' associations. The statistical information it contains is drawn from the annual returns received during the reporting period, which relate mainly to the year ending 31 December 2022.
8 October 2024
Yourmate Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 8 October 2024.
Mr Hensby made an application under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant.
01 August 2024
Balfour Beatty Staff Association was removed from the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 1 August 2024 because it no longer met the statutory definition of a trade union and it dissolved on 31st July 2024.
Mr Bhogal made a complaint under 108A (1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the union breached its rule relating to disciplinary proceedings.
The Certification Officer struck out the complaint under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it had no reasonable prospect of success.
Mr Alam made two complaints of breach of union rules in relation to branch elections. Following a hearing held by Video Conference on 24 April 2024, the Certification Officer refused to make a declaration on both complaints.
7 May 2024
Independent Oxfam Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 7 May 2024.
Mr Lambe made one breach of rule complaint about the Union's Executive Council's powers in relation to an application to join the Union . The application was made under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
Following a hearing held by Video Conference on 27 March 2024, the Certification Officer upheld the complaint and made an enforcement order intended to prevent a similar breach occurring in the future.
19 April 2024
Aircrew Officers Association Europe was removed from the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 19 April 2024 because the organisation had dissolved.
Mr Evans' complaint related to the Union's duty to hold elections for its executive members under section 46 of the 1992 Act. The Certification Officer struck out the complaint under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it had no reasonable prospect of success.
11 April 2024
Libertas Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 11 April 2024.
Mr Dent made one complaint of a breach of a Union rule relating to the NEC election in 2023. The application was under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
Following a hearing held by Video Conference on 21 February 2024, the Certification Officer refused the complaint.
Application by International Alliance of App-Based Transport Workers to be entered into the list of trade unions. The application was refused by the Certification Officer under section 3(3) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
The applicant made a complaint that the Fire Brigade Union breached section 30(2) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 in failing to comply with his request to access accounting records of the union. A hearing was set for 18 January 2024. On 17 January 2024 Mr Embery informed the Certification Officer that he had been given access to the accounting records he sought. The Certification Officer found that Mr Embery's complaint was well founded but it was not appropriate for her to make an enforcement order as access to the records had been given.
The applicant made a complaint that UNISON: The Public Service Union breached section 30(2) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 in failing to comply with his request to access accounting records of the union. Following a hearing held by Video Conference on 14 November 2023, the Certification Officer upheld the complaint and made an enforcement order to ensure the applicant's access to the relevant records.
15 December 2023
Scottish Engineering was removed from the Certification Officer's list of Employers' Associations on 14 December 2023 because it no longer meets the statutory definition of an Employers' Association.
25 October 2023
Union of Pilots, Engineers & Cabin Crew (UPECC) has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 20 October 2023
PTSC has been removed from the Certification Officer's list of Trade Unions on 6 October 2023 because it no longer meets the statutory definition of a Trade Union.
The National Association of Farriers, Blacksmiths and Agricultural Engineers has been removed from the Certification Officer's list of Employers' Associations on 27 September because it no longer meets the statutory definition of an Employers' Association.
Autonomous Workers' Union (AW Union) has been removed from the Certification Officer's list of Trade Union on 14 August 2023 because it no longer meets the statutory definition of a Trade Union.
19 October 2023
Certification Office awarded Investors In People (IIP), Gold accreditation
Investors in People has awarded the Certification Office it's Gold accreditation. Achieving this internationally-recognised standard demonstrates the Certification Office's commitment to excellence through quality people management.
Sarah Bedwell, the Certification Officer, said:
"I'm exceptionally proud of everyone for achieving this award - it recognises how well we all work together and our commitment to providing a good service especially following implementation of the new legislation. It also shows that we have adapted well not only to flexible working following the pandemic but also the way we work and provide our services. The team has taken responsibility for exploring new ideas on all aspects of our work. We will build on our success by continuing to develop together and deliver improvements for our customers and stakeholders. The award, recognises a highly empowered workforce, supportive management and an embedded commitment to developing and valuing individuals. Gold is a fantastic achievement for a very small organisation such as ours"
IIP aims to make work better through investing in the right blend of talent, motivation and leadership. The IIP framework assesses organisations in three areas:
• Leading: Inspiring people ; living the organisation's values and behaviours; and
empowering and involving people
• Supporting: Managing performance; rewarding and recognising high performance; and
structuring work
• Improving: Building capability; delivering continuous improvement; and creating
sustainable success
These are some of the things the assessor said:
The Certification Office has adapted well to flexible working and changes in legislation. Team work is excellent and people are confident in discussing challenges, caseloads and future plans. The pandemic has helped to focus on communication and people look forward to their daily 11am meetings. This has provided a valuable forum that has helped people to understand their colleagues much more in a work and personal setting. People take responsibility for improvements and are keen to get involved in new projects. They feel trusted to get on with their work, they understand key milestones and know where to seek advice and support. This has led to a culture of continuous improvement including:
• website developments
• inductions for new staff
• networking
• flexible and adaptable working conditions
• succinct and user friendly communications
People believe their professional development will be fully supported. Everyone have access to online courses, workshops and external training. Learning on the job and being supported to lead on projects is highly valued. People believe the Certification Office is a great place to work. They would recommend it to people as part of secondments or progressive career development
6 July 2023
The Annual Report of the Certification Officer, Sarah Bedwell, was laid before Parliament on 6 July 2023. The report describes the work of the Certification Officer over the year 1 April 2022 to 31 March 2023 and provides detailed information on all trade unions and employers' associations. The statistical information it contains is drawn from the annual returns received during the reporting period, which relate mainly to the year ending 31 December 2021.
26 June 2023
Empower The Workers' Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 23 June 2023.
31 May 2023
Security Industry Federation has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 19 May 2023.
This decision relates to Mr Simpson's application under 108A (1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the union breached its rules relating to the disciplinary process. This was originally determined by the Certification Officer on 18 February 2021 (D.23-25.20-21).
On appeal, the Employment Appeal Tribunal remitted a matter back to the Certification Officer for consideration. The issue the Certification Officer had to consider was whether the disciplinary process adopted by the Union gave rise to an appearance of bias by way of pre-determination. The case was determined on written submissions alone. The Certification Officer did not uphold the complaint.
12 May 2023
The Women's Rugby Association has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 11 May 2023.
National Employees Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 9 May 2023.
9 May 2023
Stage Directors U.K. Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 17 April 2023.
Mr Dawes made 10 complaints of breaches of Union rules relating to disciplinary proceedings by the Union under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. Following a hearing held by Video Conference on 14 ,15 and 24 February 2023, the Certification Officer refused 8 of the complaints and upheld the remaining 2 complaints.
8 February 2023
Change of Name: Currys Supply Chain Staff Association (CSCSA)
The Certification Officer has approved an application from Currys Supply Chain Staff Association CSCSA to change its name to Currys Trade Union - CTU with effect from 8 February 2023.
6 January 2023
The application for a certificate of independence from Solid Trade Union was approved by the Certification Officer on 6 January 2023.
22 November 2022
An application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from Solid Trade Union. Any person who wishes to submit any information relevant to this application should do so within one calendar month of the date of this notice.
Mr McKay made a complaint of a breach of rule relating to disciplinary proceedings by the Union under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation Act). The Union conceded the breach and the parties agreed to the steps needed to remedy the breach. The Certification Officer made an Order that the Union implements the agreement between the parties, set out at paragraph 13 of decision.
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. Mr Eager made a complaint of a breach of a union rule relating to balloting of the union's members on proposed rule changes. The Certification Officer struck out the complaint under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it had no reasonable prospect of success.
2 November 2022
Solid Trade Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 31 October 2022.
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. Mr Taylor made a complaint of a breach of union rule relating to disciplinary proceedings by the Union. The Certification Officer struck out the complaint under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it had no reasonable prospect of success.
9 August 2022
The application for a certificate of independence from the Criminal Justice Workers Union was approved by the Certification Officer on 9 August 2022.
Mr Sidhu made a complaint relating to District 7 of the NEC Executive seat elections in January 2021. The Certification Officer struck out the complaint under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it had no reasonable prospect of success.
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. Mr Lowe made two complaints of breaches of union rules relating to disciplinary proceedings by the Union. The Certification Officer struck out the complaints under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that they had no reasonable prospect of success.
15 July 2022
The Annual Report of the Certification Officer, Sarah Bedwell, was laid before Parliament on 14 July 2022. The report describes the work of the Certification Officer over the year 1 April 2021 to 31 March 2022 and provides detailed information on all trade unions and employers' associations. The statistical information it contains is drawn from the annual returns received during the reporting period, which relate mainly to the year ending 31 December 2020.
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. Mr Evans made eight complaints of breaches of union rules, six relating to disciplinary proceedings by the Union and two relating to the 2021 General Secretary election. The Certification Officer struck out the complaints under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that they had no reasonable prospect of success.
This decision relates to three complaints made by Mr Dawes of breaches of rules relating to the disciplinary process.
The Certification Officer struck out two of the complaints under Section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that they had no reasonable prospect of success and/or were otherwise misconceived.
The Certification Officer dismissed the other complaint upon withdrawal by the applicant.
5 July 2022
Notice is hereby given that that an application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from Criminal Justice Workers Union. Any person who wishes to submit any information relevant to this application should do so within one calendar month of the date of this notice.
1 April 2022
NEW POWERS FOR THE CERTIFICATION OFFICER
In May 2016 the government passed the Trade Union Act 2016 into law, which introduced new statutory requirements relating to trade unions and new powers for the Certification Officer.
Today, the government brings the last tranche of those new powers into force. These give the Certification Officer powers to:
*Require trade unions and employers' associations to pay a levy to fund the costs of some of her functions.
*Consider whether an organisation has breached statutory responsibilities set out in the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992, without having first received a complaint from a member of that organisation or another eligible party.
*Investigate allegations that an organisation has breached statutory responsibilities, by requiring the organisation to provide her with specific documentation and/or by appointing an inspector to investigate the matter on her behalf.
*Impose a financial penalty order or conditional financial penalty order where she finds that an organisation has breached its statutory responsibilities and/or its rules.
The Certification Officer has published guidance on her website which explains how she intends to apply these powers in practice.
Sarah Bedwell
Certification Officer
31 March 2022
The Certification Officer has carried out a review of the Trade Unions and Employers' Associations on her lists to determine whether they still met the statutory definitions. This review resulted in some organisations being removed. The updated lists can be found on her website
The applicant made a complaint that Fire Brigades Union breached section 30(2) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 in failing to comply with his request to access accounting records of the union. Following consideration of the parties' written submissions, the Certification Officer upheld the complaint and made an enforcement order to ensure the applicant's access to the relevant records.
The applicant made two complaints under 108A (1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the union breached its rules relating to the disciplinary process.
Following a hearing by Video Conferencing, the Certification Officer refused both complaints.
15 December 2021
Implementation of the Trade Union Act 2016
Over the last two weeks the Government has taken some significant steps towards implementing the remaining provisions of the Trade Union Act 2016.
Last week, statutory instruments covering the powers of the Certification Officer to deal with suspected breaches of the 1992 Act, to investigate those breaches and to enforce any orders they make, were made, and these powers will come into force on 1 April 2022.
Yesterday, the Government laid in Parliament the regulations framing the power of the Certification Officer to require trade unions and employers' associations to pay a levy and allowing her to impose financial penalties on them. Subject to parliamentary approval, these powers will also come into force from 1 April 2022.
My office has prepared some Model PF Rules - 2025 version (MS Word Document, 50.9 KB), which sets out how I intend to administer these powers once they have been implemented. At this stage, the guidance is in draft form and I would be grateful for your view as to whether it is sensible, easy to understand and helpful to your organisation.
I intend to publish finalised guidance on these matters at the point at which the new powers come into force and so it would be helpful if you could submit any comments or questions you have to info@certoffice.org before 11 March 2022. I should stress that the guidance will be subject to change after that date, being continually updated to reflect my experience of using these powers in practice.
Mr Meechan and Members of the Virgin Atlantic Company Council submitted three complaints of breaches of rules relating to the General Secretary election.
The Certification Officer struck out the complaints under Section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that they has no reasonable prospect of success and/or were otherwise misconceived.
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. Mr Morley made a complaint of a breach of a union rule in relation to the Lancashire branch secretary election. Mr Morley made a complaint of a breach of a union rule in relation to the Lancashire branch secretary election.
The Union conceded the breach and the Certification Officer made a declaration to that effect, however she did not consider it appropriate to make an enforcement order.
This decision related to Mr Embery's application under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. Mr Embery made a complaint of a breach of a union rule in relation to the constitution or proceedings of any executive committee or of any decision-making meeting. The Certification Officer struck out the complaint under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis it had no reasonable prospect of success.
This decision relates to Dr Watkins' application under 108A (1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the union breached its rules relating to the disciplinary process. This was originally determined by the Certification Officer on 14 October 2019. On appeal, the Employment Appeal Tribunal remitted one of Dr Watkins' complaints back to the Certification Officer for a new decision. Following a hearing, the Certification Officer did not uphold the complaint.
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. Mr Foden made three complaints of breaches of union rules in relation to disciplinary proceedings. The Certification Officer struck out the complaints under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis they had no reasonable prospect of success.
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. Mr Morley made two complaints of breaches of a union rules in relation to a branch election. The Certification Officer struck out the complaints under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis they had no reasonable prospect of success.
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. Mr Wilson made a complaint of breach of a union rule in relation to a branch election. The Certification Officer struck out the complaint under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it had no reasonable prospect of success.
5 October 2021
The application for a certificate of independence from Aircrew Officers Association Europe (AOAE) was approved by the Certification Officer on 5 October 2021
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. Mr Parry submitted five complaints of breaches of rule relating to local branch elections. Mr Parry withdrew two complaints; the Certification Officer struck out one complaint; and the union conceded breaches of two complaints. The Certification Officer made a declaration for the two breaches conceded by the Union but did not make an Order as the Union had started election procedures to rectify the breaches.
22 September 2021
Equal Justice The Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 22 September 2021.
19 August 2021
National Union of Professional Foster Carers (NUPFC) has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 19 August 2021.
12 August 2021
UK Private Hire Drivers Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 12 August 2021.
10 August 2021
CWOATA Trade Union has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer, because it dissolved.
Incorporated Guild of Hairdressers, Wigmakers and Perfumers was removed from the schedule of employers' associations held by the Certification Officer because it ceased to meet the definition of an employers' association under the TULRC 1992 Act.
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant.
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant.
3 August 2021
Notice is hereby given that that an application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from the Aircrew Officers Association Europe (AOAE). Any persons who wishes to submit any information relevant to this application should do so within one calendar month of the date of this notice.
9 July 2021
Change of Name: The College of Podiatry
The Certification Officer has approved an application from The College of Podiatry to change its name to The Royal College of Podiatry with effect from 9 July 2021.
8 July 2021
The Annual Report of the Certification Officer, Sarah Bedwell, was laid before Parliament on 8 July 2020. The report describes the work of the Certification Officer over the year 1 April 2020 to 31 March 2021 and provides detailed information on all trade unions and employers' associations. The statistical information it contains is drawn from the annual returns received during the reporting period, which relate mainly to the year ending 31 December 2020.
28 June 2021
Association of Trade Union Political and Public Sector Staff has been removed from the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 28 June 2021 because it has ceased to exist from 31 December 2018
UK Cinema Association Ltd was removed from the List of Employers' Associations with effect from 28 June 2021 because it ceased to meet the definition of an employers' association under the TULRC 1992 Act.
8 June 2021
Implementation of the remaining parts of the Trade Union Act 2016
The Government has today announced its plans to implement the remaining parts of the Trade Union Act 2016 which give the Certification Officer additional powers. These are:
Section 17 - Increased investigatory powers and the power to act without an application
Section 19 - Power to impose financial penalties following a finding against a Union
Section 20 - Power to impose a levy on trade unions and employers' associations to contribute to the costs of the Certification Office
Any enquiries regarding the government plans should be sent to: enquiries@beis.gov.uk
7 June 2021
Association of Local Council Clerks has been removed from the schedule of trade unions and has been entered on the Official list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 7 June 2021.
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant.
15 March 2021
PPU has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer because it dissolved on 2 February 2021.
9 March 2021
Autonomous Workers' Union (AW Union) has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 9 March 2021.
5 March 2021
Trade Union for Ethnic Minority Social Workers (TUEMSW) has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 5 March 2021.
The applicant made three complaints under 108A (1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the union breached its rules relating to the disciplinary process.
Following a hearing by Video Conferencing, the Certification Officer refused all three complaints.
Mr Hussain made 5 complaints of breach of union rules in relation to the elections at the South East No.5 branch of the Union. Complaints 2-5 were struck out previously (D/20-23/19-20).
The Certification Officer struck out the remaining complaint under Section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it has no reasonable prospect of success and/or is otherwise misconceived previously .
The applicant made a complaint under section 72A of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 for an alleged breach of Section 71(1) against the union for using £240 from its General Fund for political purposes. The Certification Officer struck out the complaint under section 256ZA of the 1992 Act on the basis that it had no reasonable prospect of success and/or is otherwise misconceived.
11 December 2020
The Workers' Union
We have had number of enquiries relating to The Workers' Union. The Workers' Union is a commercial organisation offering services to members. It is not a trade union as defined by the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 Act and is not subject to the Certification Officer's powers.
The applicant made a complaint under 108A (1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the union breached its rule with regards to the eligibility criteria for the election of the General Secretary.
The Certification Officer struck out the complaint under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it had no reasonable prospect of success.
The applicant made two complaints under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the Union had breached its rule relating to the election and removal of a workplace representative. Following a hearing on 29 October , the Certification Officer refused both the complaints.
6 November 2020
British Lace Federation was removed from the List of Employers' Associations with effect from 05 November 2020 as it ceased to be an Employers' Association.
Mr Alam made three complaints of breach of union rules in relation to branch elections. The Certification Officer struck out complaints one and two under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that they had no reasonable prospect of success and/or are otherwise misconceived. The Union conceded complaint three. The Certification Officer declined to make an Enforcement Order.
Mr Simpson made a complaint that Unite the Union breached section 30(2) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 in failing to comply with his request to access accounting records of the union.
The Certification Officer found that the union had not breached Section 30 of the 1992 Act in respect of the Applicant's complaint that he had been denied access to the Union's accounting records.
7 October 2020
CERTIFICATION OFFICE RECOGNISED AS INVESTOR IN PEOPLE
Investors in People has awarded the Certification Office it's Silver accreditation. Achieving this internationally-recognised standard demonstrates the Certification Office's commitment to excellence through quality people management.
Sarah Bedwell, the Certification Officer, said:
"I'm really proud of everyone for achieving this award - it recognises how well we all work together and our commitment to providing a good service. We will build on our success by continuing to develop together and deliver improvements for our customers and stakeholders. The award, recognises a highly empowered workforce, supportive management and an embedded commitment to developing individuals. Silver is a fantastic achievement and something only 20% of the organisations that IIP assess achieve."
Investors in People (IIP) aims to make work better through investing in the right blend of talent, motivation and leadership. The IIP framework assesses organisations in three areas:
• Leading: Inspiring people ; living the organisation's values and behaviours; and empowering and involving
people
• Supporting: Managing performance; rewarding and recognising high performance; and structuring work
• Improving: Building capability; delivering continuous improvement; and creating sustainable success
These are some of the things the assessor said:
"The Certification Office works as a team aiming to provide an open, accessible and efficient service... [P]eople confirmed they have clear direction, guidance and support from managers. People believe they are trusted and have been encouraged to get involved and/or participate in projects and initiatives. Partnerships with ACAS and BEIS have strengthened. Business as usual continues and there is now a focus on conducting virtual hearings."
"Daily meetings have been embraced and people believe this has created greater cohesion across the team. Telephone conversations are encouraged to help minimise emails. Remote working has been a positive experience, and everyone will have a choice about when and how they return to the office. This will be a blended approach with plans in place to work with different colleagues each week."
"The Certification Office welcomes feedback. It has continued to improve systems, processes and how it manages and develops people. The team are optimistic about future developments and are keen to capture the positives on how they have worked during the pandemic. Increased delegation has created a greater level of trust and improved accountability. This has been instrumental in helping to achieve a higher level of accreditation as an Investors in People organisation"
5 October 2020
Voice merged into Community on 1 October 2020. Please note that Voice ceased to exist from 1 October 2020 and has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer.
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant.
24 August 2020
An application to register the Instrument of Transfer of Voice to Community was received by the Certification Officer on 19 August 2020.
Mr Simpson made 12 complaints of breach of union rules in relation to his appeal hearing. The Certification Officer struck out the complaints under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that they have no reasonable prospect of success and/or are otherwise misconceived.
13 July 2020
App Drivers and Couriers Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 13 July 2020.
9 July 2020
The Annual Report of the Certification Officer, Sarah Bedwell, was laid before Parliament on 9 July 2020. The report describes the work of the Certification Officer over the year 1 April 2019 to 31 March 2020 and provides detailed information on all trade unions and employers' associations. The statistical information it contains is drawn from the annual returns received during the reporting period, which relate mainly to the year ending 31 December 2018.
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant.
29 June 2020
Criminal Justice Workers Union (CJWU) has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 29 June 2020.
Change of Name: National Hairdressers' Federation Limited to National Hair and Beauty Federation Limited
The Certification Officer has approved an application from National Hairdressers' Federation Limited to change its name to National Hair and Beauty Federation Limited with effect from 27 March 2020.
25 March 2020
Coronavirus (COVID-19) - Impact on Trade Unions and Employers' Associations
The Certification Officer recognises that trade unions and employers' associations may find it difficult to comply with some of the requirements set out in the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 ("the Act") because of the impact of the coronavirus pandemic
The Certification Officer is clear that the priority for trade unions must be to comply with the government's guidance on dealing with the pandemic, and that the safety of their staff and members is paramount.
Where a trade union believes that it cannot comply with the Act, that it will miss any deadlines set for it by the Certification Officer, or that it must breach its rules relating to any of the matters set out in Section 108A of the Act, it should seek to notify the Certification Officer at the earliest opportunity.
The Certification Officer will consider any representations made to her relating to any of these issues on a case-by-case basis, and she will seek to accommodate any requests made in those representations. The health and safety of Union Members, staff and the general public will be her primary concern.
It is important to note that the Certification Officer and her staff will be working away from the office for the foreseeable future. If you need to contact us please do so by email. It would be helpful if you could copy all emails to info@certoffice.org to ensure that we can deal with your issue if your contact is not available.
It is possible that, whilst our premises are closed, we may not be able to offer our full range of service or to reply to you as quickly as usual. You should, however, continue to contact us as normal and we will get back to you as soon as you can.
18 March 2020
Union Workers' Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 18 March 2020.
The applicant made one complaint under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the Union had breached a provision of its EC Guidance relating to the election of workplace representatives.
Following a hearing on 7 January 2020, the Certification Officer refused the complaint.
20 February 2020
The City Screen Staff Forum has been removed from the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 20 February 2020 because it has ceased to exist.
28 January 2020
Independent Democratic Union merged into Community on 27 January 2020. Please note the Independent Democratic Union ceased to exist from 27 January 2020 and has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer.
22 January 2020
Leicestershire Overmen Deputies and Shotfirers Association has been removed from the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 08 January 2020 because it has ceased to exist.
The applicant made two complaints under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the Union had breached rules relating to the appointment and/ or removal of a person from office.
Following a hearing on 17 December 2019, the Certification Officer refused both the complaints.
Mr Crew made a complaint under s46 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 relating to the election for Assistant General Secretary for the Union's Aegon Branch. The Certification Officer upheld the complaint and made an enforcement order in relation to the breach of Section 46(1)(a) of the 1992 Act.
Mr Jones made a complaint of a breach of union rule relating to the 2019-2021 NEC Election Procedures. The Certification Officer struck out the application under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it has no reasonable prospect of success and/or is otherwise misconceived.
Mr Dunham made a complaint under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the Union had breached a disciplinary rule in relation to the disciplinary proceedings. The Certification Officer dismissed his complaint.
11 November 2019
An application to register the Instrument of Transfer of Independent Democratic Union to Community was received by the Certification Officer on 8 November 2019.
CU Staff Consultative Group has been removed from the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 11 November 2019 because it has ceased to exist.
Mr Hussain made 5 complaints of breach of union rules in relation to the elections at the South East No.5 branch of the Union. The Certification Officer struck out complaints 2-5 under Section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it has no reasonable prospect of success and/or is otherwise misconceived.
Complaint 1 is yet to be determine by the Certification Officer.
25 October 2019
Scottish Building Federation has been removed from the schedule of employers' associations held by the Certification Officer because it ceased to meet the definition of an employers' association under the TULRC 1992 Act.
22 October 2019
WALGAS TU has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 21 October 2019.
Radio, Electrical and Television Retailers' Association (RETRA) Limited has been removed from the schedule of employers' associations held by the Certification Officer because it ceased to meet the definition of an employers' association under the TULRC 1992 Act.
Mrs Parlour made one complaint under s46 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 relating to the election of the General Secretary. The Certification Officer upheld the complaint but did not find it appropriate to make an enforcement order as the union had already started the process of electing a General Secretary.
Dr Watkins made six complaints of breaches of rules relating to the union's disciplinary procedure. The Certification Office dismissed complaints 2-6. Complaint 1 was conceded by the union. The Certification Officer declined to make an enforcement order as Mr Watkins period of suspension ended and had no bearing for his eligibility to stand for Council elections in 2018.
10 October 2019
Mastic Asphalt Council has been removed from the list of employers' associations held by the Certification Officer because it ceased to meet the definition of an employers' association under the TULRC 1992 Act.
20 September 2019
British Allied Trade Federation has been removed from the schedule of employers' associations held by the Certification Officer with effect from 20 September 2019 because it ceased to meet the definition of an employers' association under the TULRC 1992 Act.
5 September 2019
The Annual Report of the Certification Officer, Sarah Bedwell, was laid before Parliament today 5 September 2019. The report describes the work of the Certification Officer over the year 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019 and provides detailed information on all trade unions and employers' associations. The statistical information it contains is drawn from the annual returns received during the reporting period, which relate mainly to the year ending 31 December 2017.
31 August 2019
R&C Trade Union has been removed from the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 31 August 2019 because it has ceased to exist.
Mr Oley and Others made a complaint under section 72A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation Act) 1992 for an alleged breach of Section 71(1) against the union for using £1,965.34 from its General Fund for political purposes. The Certification Officer made a declaration but did not make an Order as the Union had repaid the monies in its General Fund
Dr Watkins made a number of complaints of breach of union rules in relation to disciplinary proceedings. The Certification Officer struck out his Complaint 7 under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it had no reasonable prospect of success.
25 July 2018
The Certification Officer's Annual Report 2018-19 will not be published in July 2019 as planned. It will now be published after the Parliamentary summer recess.
Dr Tavsanoglu made a complaint of breach of union rule in relation to her alleged removal from office. The Certification Officer struck out the application under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it has no reasonable prospect of success and/or is otherwise misconceived.
This application was made under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant.
2 July 2019
Bluechip Staff Association merged into Community on 2 July 2019. Please note that Bluechip Staff Association ceased to exist from 2 July 2019 and has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer.
Mr Simpson made 3 complaints of breach of union rules in relation to disciplinary proceedings. The Certification Officer struck out complaint 3 under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it had reasonable prospect of success and/or is otherwise misconceived.
Complaints 1 and 2 were struck by the Certification Officer in the decision D/5-6/19-20.
Mr Dinsdale made 3 complaints of breach of union rules in relation to the election of the Sellafield Site Shop Stewards and the Sellafield Branch Committee . The Certification Officer struck out complaint 3 under Section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it has no reasonable prospect of success and/or is otherwise misconceived.
Complaints 1 and 2 have yet to be determine by the Certification Officer.
7 June 2019
CWOATA Trade Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 07 June 2019.
Mr Simpson made 3 complaints of breach of union rules in relation to disciplinary proceedings. The Certification Officer struck out complaints 1 and 2 under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that they have no reasonable prospect of success and/or are otherwise misconceived.
Complaint 3 has yet to be determined by the Certification Officer.
Mr Dosanjh made a complaint of breach of union rule in relation to the election of the Deputy General Secretary. The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant.
24 May 2019
An application to register the Instrument of Transfer of Bluechip Staff Association to Community was received by the Certification Officer on 16 May 2019.
Mr Bromfield made two complaints of breach of union rule in relation to disciplinary proceedings. The Certification Officer struck out the application under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it has no reasonable prospect of success and/or is otherwise misconceived.
The applicant made a number of complaints under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the Union had breached its rules relating to disciplinary proceedings.
Following a preliminary hearing on Thursday 21 March 2019, the Certification Officer determined that the complaints would proceed to a full hearing to decide the applicant's complaints
Mr Newton made a complaint of breach of union rule in relation to disciplinary proceedings. The Certification Officer struck out the application under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it has no reasonable prospect of success and/or is otherwise misconceived.
The applicant made one complaint under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the Union had breached rules relating to disciplinary proceedings.
The Certification Officer made a declaration that the Union breached its rule in removing her from her position as a shop steward.
The Certification Officer declined to make an enforcement order.
1 April 2019
Perth and District Master Plumbers Association has been removed from the schedule of employers' associations held by the Certification Officer because it dissolved on 31 December 2018.
The applicant made six complaints under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the Union had breached rules relating to disciplinary proceedings.
A hearing on the first complaint was held on 8 January 2019. Following the hearing, the Certification Officer upheld the complaint and considered it appropriate to make an enforcement order. The Certification Officer ordered that:-
Mr Kelly be restored to membership of the Musicians' Union
Mr Kelly be reinstated to the Recording and Broadcast Committee
Mr Kelly be restored as an Approved Musicians' Union Contractor
The Union must not remove Mr Kelly's Approved Musicians' Union Contractor Status, or include him within the Ask us First List, on the basis of any disciplinary or other Union process which arises from Mr Kelly's membership of the Union and which is based on information which was considered as part of the disciplinary process which began with the General Secretary's letter of 24 January 2018.
This application was made under Sections 30(2)(a), 30(2)(b) and 30(2)(c) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant
15 January 2019
Lanarkshire Master Plumbers' Association has been removed from the schedule of employers' associations held by the Certification Officer because it dissolved on 31 December 2017.
The applicant made one complaint under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the Union had breached rules relating to removal from office.
Following a hearing on 28 November 2018, the Certification Officer refused the complaint.
The applicant made seven complaints under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the Union had breached rules relating to disciplinary proceedings.
Following a hearing on 13 November 2018, the Certification Officer refused all these complaints.
3 December 2018
The application for a certificate of independence from Cleaners and Allied Independent Workers Union (CAIWU) was approved by the Assistant Certification Officer on 3 December 2018
Upon an application made by Mr Lascelles under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations Act 1992 that Prospect had breached an implied rule of the union relating to the balloting of members on any issue other than industrial action.
The application is dismissed upon withdrawal by Mr Lascelles.
The applicant made two complaints under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 relating to branch elections. Prior to the hearing, the union conceded that the breaches had occurred. The Certification Officer upheld two complaints in relation to a breach of rules of the branch constitution and considered it appropriate to make an enforcement order. The Certification Officer ordered that:-
The Union undertake the remaining stages of the current ballot, which was originally concluded in December 2017 and which is the subject of the complaints made by Mr Hussain, in accordance with the Union's Rules. The result of the ballot should be declared by 3 December 2018.
The applicant made three complaints under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 relating to the union's West Midlands Regional Committee elections.
The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant.
31 October 2018
Psychotherapy and Counselling Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 31 October 2018.
The applicant made a complaint under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the Union had breached a disciplinary rule in relation to the applicant's suspension from a branch office.
The Certification Officer dismissed this complaint by a decision dated 15 October 2018.
The applicant made one complaint under Section 55(1) and two complaints under Section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 relating to the union's presidential and council elections.
The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant.
The applicants made 10 complaints in relation to the 2017 election of the General Secretary of Unite the Union. This decision of Assistant Certification Officer, Mr Jeffrey Burke QC, deals with complaints 2 to 10 that were determined following a five day hearing held between 25 and 29 June 2018. The Assistant Certification Officer dismissed all nine complaints.
Complaint one was determined following a hearing on 27 March 2018 before Mr Burke QC. In a decision dated 4 May 2018 he dismissed the complaint. D/2/18-19
2 October 2018
Poole Greyhound Trainers Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 2 October 2018.
The applicant made four complaints Under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 concerning breaches of union rules in relation to disciplinary proceedings against him.
The Certification Officer upheld all the complaints but declined to make an Enforcement Order.
11 September 2018
Notice is hereby given that that an application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from the Cleaners and Allied Independent Workers Union (CAIWU). Any persons who wishes to submit any information relevant to this application should do so within one calendar month of the date of this notice.
14 August 2018
Change of Name: The Society of Chiropodists and Podiatrists to The College of Podiatry
The Certification Officer has approved an application from The Society of Chiropodists and Podiatrists to change its name to The College of Podiatry with effect from 13 August 2018.
9 August 2018
ASPSU has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer because it ceased to be a trade union on 31 July 2017.
The applicant made a complaint under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the Union had breached a provision of its handbook in relation to a representative post in NHS Highland.
On 16 July 2018 the Certification Officer refused this complaint having found that the handbook does not form part of the Union's rules.
18 July 2018
The Certification Officer's Annual Report 2017-2018 will not be published in July 2018 as planned. It will now be published after the Parliamentary summer recess.
5 July 2018
National Union of Mineworkers (North East Area) and National Union of Mineworkers (Scotland Area) have been removed from the schedule of trade unions on the grounds that neither of them meet the statutory definition of a trade union.
2 July 2018
Britannia Staff Union has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer because it ceased to exist on 1 July 2018.
The applicant made two complaints under 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the union had breached its rules relating to the disciplinary process. The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant.
7 June 2018
Scottish Colliery Enginemen Boilermen and Tradesmens Association has been removed from the schedule of trade unions as it ceased to be a trade union on 1 March 2018.
9 May 2018
Change of Name: Retained Firefighters Union to Fire and Rescue Services Association.
The Certification Officer has approved an application from Retained Firefighters Union to change its name to Fire and Rescue Services Association with effect from 9 May 2018.
The applicant made two complaints under 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the union had breached its rules around branch elections. The Certification Officer refused both of these complaints.
The applicants made 10 complaints in relation to the 2017 election of the General Secretary of Unite the Union. Assistant Certification Officer, Mr Jeffrey Burke QC, held a hearing on 27 March 2018, to determine the preliminary point, dealt with in Complaint 1, that, under the Union's rules, there was no power to hold the election at all, at the time it was held. The Assistant Certification Officer resolved this preliminary point in favour of the Union. The remaining complaints will be heard over 5 days commencing on 25 June 2018. The details of the venue will be confirmed shortly.
Mr Cullen made a complaint of breach of union rules in relation to removal from a post. The Certification Officer struck out the application under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that it has no reasonable prospect of success and/or is otherwise misconceived.
1 May 2018
NACO merged into USDAW on 1 May 2018. Please note that NACO ceased to exist from 1 May 2018 and has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer.
Mr Rolfe made three complaints of breach of union rules in relation to a disqualification from holding NEC posts until 2016. Two complaints were dismissed upon withdrawal by Mr Rolfe. The Certification Officer upheld one complaint in relation to a breach of union rule 10.9 and considered it appropriate to make an enforcement order. The Certification Officer ordered that:-
The NEC remove the disqualification of Mr Rolfe from holding any National Executive post which was imposed on him under rule 10.9 following his resignation as a Prison Officer on 3 May 2017. This order will take effect from the date of this decision.
The applicant made a complaint alleging that the Union breached a rule relating to its Executive Committees. The complaint was dismissed upon withdrawal by the applicant.
7 March 2018
The application for a certificate of independence from National House Building Council Staff Association was approved by the Assistant Certification Officer on 7 March 2018
7 February 2018
Change of Name: Leeds Building Society Staff Association to Leeds Building Society Colleague Association.
The Certification Officer has approved an application from Leeds Building Society Staff Association to change its name to Leeds Building Society Colleague Association with effect from 7 February 2018.
5 February 2018
Association of Somerset Inseminators has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer because it ceased to exist on 1 September 2017.
Mr Markham made a complaint alleging that GMB breached section 30(2) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 in failing to comply with his request to access branch accounting records. The Certification Officer upheld the complaint after the union conceded the breach. No enforcement order was made as Mr Markham had been granted access to the requested records.
1 February 2018
Staff Union West Bromwich Building Society merged into Community on 1 February 2018. Please note that Staff Union West Bromwich Building Society ceased to exist from 1 February 2018 and has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer.
The applicant made two complaints under 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 about her alleged removal from office as branch secretary. The Certification Officer refused both of these complaints.
The claimants made three complaints alleging that URTU had breached its rules relating to disciplinary proceedings. The Assistant Certification Officer upheld one complaint that the union had breached its rules and dismissed the other two complaints. The ACO has now received further submissions from parties following the findings in this decision and is now considering the appropriate remedy.
9 January 2018
National Union of Mineworkers (Northumberland Area) has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer because it ceased to exist on 30 November 2017.
Prof Barron made nine complaints of breaches of rule of the LSE branch of the UCU pursuant to s.108A(2) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. The Assistant Certification Officer (ACO) made a declaration that breaches had occurred in relation to complaints 2 and 8.
Complaint 2 - the ACO made a declaration that the union had breached 9.1 of the LSE branch rules by failing to ensure the branch committee appointed a returning officer for elections.
Complaint 8 - the ACO made a declaration that the union breached rule 11 of the LSE branch rules by failing to ensure the delegates to the 2017 Congress were elected from members of the LSE branch.
The ACO did not make any enforcement orders.
Complaint 3 was dismissed as it fell outside the Certification Officer's jurisdiction. Complaint 5 was dismissed as it was submitted out of time. Complaints 1,4,6,7 and 9 were dismissed as no breach or threatened breach had been found.
19 December 2017
An application to register the Instrument of Transfer of Staff Union West Bromwich Building Society (SUWBBS) to Community was received by the Certification Officer on 18 December 2017.
Dr Elliott made four complaints and Dr Borbora made three complaints alleging breaches of union rule relating to disciplinary procedures under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
The Certification Officer refused both Dr Elliott's and Dr Borbora's applications.
The applicant made two complaints under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that Unite the Union had breached its rules relating to disciplinary proceedings. Following submissions from the parties on two preliminary issues the Assistant Certification Officer, appointed by the Certification Officer to hear the complaints, decided to uphold the applicant's complaints of breach of rules.
13 November 2017
Notice is hereby given that that an application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from the National House Building Council Staff Association (NHBC Staff Association). Any persons who wishes to submit any information relevant to this application should do so within one calendar month of the date of this notice.
3 November 2017
Confederation of British Surgery has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 3 November 2017.
The applicant made five complaints under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 that the National Crime Officers Association had breached its rules relating to disciplinary proceedings. The Certification Officer made five declarations that the union had breached its rules. The following enforcement orders were made:
1.The National Executive Committee's decision at its meeting on 7 to 8 September 2016 to expel Mr Tully from membership of the NCOA is null and void.
2.The Union make arrangement to restore Mr Tully to membership of the NCOA by 19 November 2017.
The Certification Officer has decided not to exercise his discretion to appoint an inspector to investigate the financial affairs of National Union of Mineworkers (Northumberland Area). He has written to the union to inform them of his decision and his reasons. The letter to the union, which contains background information and comment, is published here.
21 September 2017
CU Staff Consultative Group has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 21 September 2017.
Ms Penkethman and Mr Walker made one complaint alleging a breach of rule relating to canvasing during the 2017 elections in the Midland No 7 branch of the CWU under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. Mr Walker made a further separate complaint relating to the receiving of a voting paper during the same election.
The Certification Officer refused both of the claimants' applications
4 September 2017
Welsh Local Government Association was added to the list on 12 June 2017.
1 September 2017
Association of Teachers and Lecturers and National Union of Teachers amalgamated to form National Education Union on 1 September 2017. Please note that both Association of Teachers and Lecturers and National Union of Teachers ceased to exist from 1 September 2017 and have been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer. The new, amalgamated, union, National Education Union, has been added to the list.
21 August 2017
The application for a certificate of independence from the United Voices of the World was approved by the Assistant Certification Officer on 21 August 2017.
Change of Name: Graphic Enterprise Scotland to Print Scotland - The Certification Officer has approved an application from "Graphic Enterprise Scotland" to change its name to "Print Scotland" with effect from 21 August 2017.
Ellington Branch of the North East Area of the National Union of Mineworkers has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer because it ceased to exist on 21 August 2017
The claimant alleges that Unite the Union breached its rules in relation to disciplinary proceedings against him. Following a preliminary hearing the Assistant Certification Officer identified the issues in dispute which fall to be determined at a full hearing of the complaints. The Certification Officer also identified a preliminary issue to be decided by him before any further hearing. He set directions for the full hearing.
2 August 2017
Change of Name: National Association of Stable Staff to National Association of Racing Staff
An application to change the name of National Association of Stable Staff to National Association of Racing Staff was approved on 2 August 2017.
18 July 2017
The Annual Report of the Certification Officer, Gerard Walker, was laid before Parliament today 18 July 2017. The report describes the work of the Certification Officer over the year 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 and provides detailed information on all trade unions and employers' associations. The statistical information it contains is drawn from the annual returns received during the reporting period, which relate mainly to the year ending 31 December 2015.
The applicants made 16 complaints that UNISON had breached its rules in relation to its 2015 General Secretary election. Many of these complaints contained multiple allegations of breaches. In addition it was alleged that the Union breached section 49(4) and 49(6) of the 1992 Act also in relation to the 2015 UNISON General Secretary election.
The Assistant Certification Officer made decisions relating to all of the above complaints. She made one declaration that the union had breached its rules. No enforcement order was made.
22 May 2017
National Union of Mineworkers (Scottish Area) has been removed from the schedule of trade unions as it ceased to be a trade union on 22 May 2017.
The applicant made four complaints under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union Labour Relations (Consolidation Act) 1992 that the GMB had breached rules of the Union relating to matters specified in section 108A(2).
The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant.
28 April 2017
An application to register the Instrument of Amalgamation of the Association of Teachers and Lecturers and the
National Union of Teachers was received on 25 April 2017.
24 April 2017
Fencing Contractors Association has been removed from the schedule of employers' associations maintained by the Certification Officer because it dissolved on 31 December 2016
1 April 2017
Notice is hereby given that that an application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from the United Voices of the World. Any person who wishes to submit any information relevant to this application should do so within one calendar month of the date of this notice.
20 March 2017
Lancaster Morecambe and South Lakeland Master Plumbers Association was removed from the List of Employers' Associations with effect from 17 March 2017 as it ceased to be an Employers' Association.
Under section 3(3) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. The Certification Officer refused the application by Disabled Workers Union to be entered in the list of trade unions.
The claimants made four complaints of that the Union breached its rules on relation to branch officer elections in union's LE/2000 Branch and one complaint of a breach of section 30 (2) of the 1992 Act in relation to the request for access to accounting records. The Certification Officer upheld one complaint of breach of rule and dismissed the other complaints. No enforcement order was made.
Mr Mathewson made seven complaints alleging the union had breached its rules and one complaint of the union's breach of Chapter IV of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. Following correspondence, the Certification Officer struck out all eight complaints under section 256ZA(1)(a) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the grounds that they had no reasonable prospect of success and/or were otherwise misconceived.
23 January 2017
The Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians (UCATT) merged into Unite the Union on 1 January 2017. Please note that UCATT ceased to exist from 1 January 2017 and has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer
20 January 2017
UFS merged into Community on 1 January 2017. Please note that UFS ceased to exist from 1 January 2017 and has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer.
20 January 2017
Broadcasting Entertainment Cinematograph and Theatre Union merged into Prospect on 1 January 2017. Please note that Broadcasting Entertainment Cinematograph and Theatre Union ceased to exist from 1 January 2017 and has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer.
The applicant made a complaint under section 108A(1) of the Trade Union Labour Relations (Consolidation Act) 1992 that the GMB had breached rules of the Union relating to matters specified in section 108A(2).
The Certification Officer dismissed the application upon withdrawal by the applicant.
1 December 2016
An application to register the Instrument of Transfer of UFS to Community was received by the Certification Officer on 17 November 2016.
The applicants made three complaints relating to the 2016 Election for General Secretary of the Union. These included two alleged breaches of Chapter IV of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 and one alleged breach of one of the Union's rules. The Certification Officer upheld all three complaints and made a single enforcement order in relation to the breach of Section 47(1) of the 1992 Act - Complaint 2.
9 November 2016
The Association of Principal fire Officers (APFO) merged into Prospect on 7 November 2016. Please note that APFO ceased to exist from 6 November 2016 and has been removed from the list of trade union maintained by the Certification Officer.
The claimant made seven complaints that the union had allegedly breached its rules in relation to eligibility to hold lay office on its Executive Council, and related issues. The Certification Officer dismissed all the complaints.
24 October 2016
An application to register the Instrument of Transfer of Broadcasting Entertainment Cinematograph and Theatre Union to Prospect was received by the Certification Officer on 18 October 2016.
The claimants alleged that Unison breached its rules and the 1992 Act in relation to the election for the position of General Secretary of UNISON in late 2015. At the preliminary hearing on 6th October 2016, the Assistant Certification Officer determined that the complaints from all four applicants should be consolidated and determined at a single hearing. In addition the issues to be determined were identified and agreed. The ACO also gave directions for the full merits hearing which is to be heard on 19,20 and 21 December 2016.
15 September 2016
Pursuant to section 4 of the Trade Union and Labour (Relations) Consolidation Act 1992 ("the 1992 Act"), the Certification Officer removed the National Association of Colliery Overmen, Deputies and Shotfirers from the list of trade unions on the grounds that it is no longer a trade union within the meaning of the 1992 Act (Listings Decision: National Association of Colliery Officials Deputies and Shotfirers (CO/L/2/16-17)).
Mr Bannister brought five complaints in which he alleged that UNISON: The Public Service Union breached its rules in relation to the UNISON 2015 General Secretary election. Three of Mr Bannister's complaints were struck out under section 256ZA(1)(a) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the basis that they had no reasonable prospect of success and/or were otherwise misconceived. The remaining two complaints are to proceed to a full hearing in order to be determined.
Mr Brough made a complaint alleging that UCATT had breached section 24(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 by failing to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the entries in its register of members were accurate and kept up-to-date. The Certification Officer upheld the complaint but considered it was inappropriate to make an enforcement order.
24 August 2016
Society of Local Council Clerks has been removed from the schedule of trade unions as it ceased to be a trade union on 17 August 2016.
18 August 2016
The Certification Officer has approved an application from "Cinema Exhibitors Association Ltd" to change its name to "UK Cinema Association Ltd" with effect from 18 August 2016.
Shield Guarding Staff Association has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer because it dissolved on 21 May 2016.
17 August 2016
Association of Local Council Clerks has been entered on the schedule of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 16 August 2016.
Mr James Forbes made two complaints against the Scottish Secondary Teachers' Association ("the Association") in which he alleged that the Association breached its rules in relation to its internal disciplinary procedure and breached section 47(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. Mr Forbes died on 18 April 2016. On 20 July 2016 his complaints were withdrawn on behalf of his estate. The Certification Officer dismissed Mr Forbes' complaints upon withdrawal by his estate.
Mr Bentham brought two complaints in which he alleged that UCATT breached its rules in relation to its internal disciplinary procedure. The complaints were struck out under section 256ZA(1)(a) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 ("the 1992 Act") on the basis that they had been brought to the Certification Officer outside the time limits set out in section 108A(6) and (7) of the 1992 Act.
24 June 2016
National Union of Mineworkers (Leicester Area) removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer following a decision by the Certification Officer that it was no longer a trade union within the meaning of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 (Listings Decision: National Union of Mineworkers (Leicester Area) (CO/L/16-17)).
2 June 2016
The application for a certificate of independence from the Artists' Union England was approved by the Assistant Certification Officer on 2 June 2016.
11 May 2016
Whatman International Staff Association has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer because it dissolved on 9 October 2015.
The claimant made a complaint alleging that Unite the Union breached section 30(2) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 in failing to comply with his request to access accounting records of the union. Upon the union providing the records the claimant withdrew the complaint. The complaint was dismissed upon withdrawal by the claimant.
The claimants alleged that Unite the Union breached its rules in relation to the 2015 Branch LE/2000 election and breached section 30(2)(a) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. At the preliminary hearing the Certification Officer determined which branch constitution was valid at the time of the election and that the Branch Balloting Protocol constituted rules of the union. The Certification Officer also determined which complaints made by the claimants would proceed to a full hearing.
Mr Brough made two complaints alleging the union had breached its rules relating to disciplinary matters. Following correspondence, the Certification Officer struck out both complaints under section 256ZA(1)(a) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the grounds that they had no reasonable prospect of success and/or were otherwise misconceived.
Mr Chapman made five complaints relating to disciplinary proceedings by the Union. Mr Chapman alleged that the Union breached a number of its own rules during disciplinary proceedings against him and in handling a complaint by him against another Union member. The Certification Officer refused four of the claimant's applications but declared in the claimant's favour on the fifth complaint. The Certification Officer did not make any enforcement order.
13 April 2016
Notice is hereby given that that an application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from the Artists' Union England. Any person who wishes to submit any information relevant to this application should do so within one calendar month of the date of this notice.
30 March 2016
Cleaners and Allied Independent Workers Union (CAIWU) has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 16 March 2016.
Mr Henderson made five complaints relating to the Union's election for the position of General Secretary and Treasurer. These included four alleged breaches of 47(1) Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 and one alleged breach of one of the Union's by-laws. The Certification Officer refused all five of the claimant's applications.
16 March 2016
The Association of Professional Ambulance Personnel has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer because it dissolved on 31 December 2015.
The claimant made a complaint alleging that Unite the Union had breached section 30(2)(a) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 in failing to comply within 28 days with her request to access accounting records of the union. The Certification Officer upheld the complaint and made an enforcement order.
Mr Sweeney brought two complaints in which he alleged that UCATT breached its rules in not paying his or the person accompanying him their travel expenses in order to attend an appeal hearing before the General Council of UCATT. The complaints were struck out under section 256ZA(1)(a) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the grounds that they had no reasonable prospect of success and/or were otherwise misconceived.
18 November 2015
The Union of Country Sports Workers has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer because it dissolved on 30 June 2015.
Mr Rowlandson made five complaints alleging that the union had breached its rules in relation to branch elections and one complaint in relation to disciplinary procedures. The union conceded breaches for four of the six complaints and the Certification Officer declared, by consent, that the relevant rules had been breached as alleged. He made a single enforcement order in relation to these complaints. The Certification Officer refused to make a declaration on the remaining two complaints.
Mr Radford made three complaints alleging that the union had breached two of its rules in relation to disciplinary procedures. The Certification refused the claimant's application in relation to the first complaint. The Certification Officer upheld the second and third complaints for which he also made enforcement orders. The decision was issued to the parties on 22 October 2015 and reviewed, following an application from the Union, on 12 November 2015.
Mr Edward Ritson made six complaints alleging that the NUT breached its rules in relation to the nomination procedure followed by its Sefton Branch for local officers and committee. Following a settlement between the parties, Mr Ritson withdrew his complaints, which were dismissed by the Certification Officer upon withdrawal.
Mr Murray made a complaint alleging that the union had breached one of its rules in relation to the election of the Scottish Regional representative to its Executive Council that took place in 2015. The union conceded a breach of the rule. The Certification Officer made an enforcement order that the election be re-run.
1 October 2015
The Bus Workers Alliance has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer because it dissolved on 29 May 2015.
3 September 2015
The Certification Officer refused the application by Equal Justice to be entered in the list of trade unions (Listings decision: Equal Justice).
11 August 2015
The Federation of Professional Railway Staff has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer because it dissolved on 30 June 2015.
The Pop-Up Union has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer. The Certification Office last had contact with the Pop-Up Union in May 2013, when it was entered on the list of trade unions. Since then all attempts at contacting the organisation have been unsuccessful. It appears that the Pop-Up Union had ceased to exist by the end of 2013. In the circumstances it never came under a duty to supply this office with an annual return.
30 July 2015
British Ceramic Confederation has been removed from the schedule of employers' associations held by the Certification Officer with effect from 30 July 2015 because it is no longer an employers' association.
Mr Brough made a complaint alleging that the union had breached its rules in relation to its internal disciplinary procedure. The Certification Officer dismissed the complaint.
20 July 2015
The Annual Report of the Certification Officer (2014-2015) is published and laid before Parliament. It is available to be downloaded from the Certification Officer's website. Hard copies of the report are available upon request to the Certification Office (info@certoffice.org).
25 June 2015
The Certification Officer has approved an application from "Local Government Yorkshire and Humber" to change its name to "Yorkshire and Humber (Local Authorities) Employers' Association" with effect from 25 June 2015.
The claimant alleged that the union breached its rules in relation to a ballot of members of the Doncaster Local Government Branch Retired Members Section. The application was struck out under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the grounds that the complaint advanced by the claimant had no reasonable prospect of success and/or was otherwise misconceived.
19 June 2015
The Staff Association of Bank of Baroda (UK Region) merged into Unite the Union on 19 June 2015. Please note that the Staff Association of Bank of Baroda (UK Region) ceased to exist from 18 June 2015 and has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer.
4 June 2015
The application for a certificate of independence from the National Crime Officers Association was approved by the Assistant Certification Officer on 4 June 2015.
The claimant brought five complaints against the Union of Democratic Mineworkers. The complaints alleged breaches of rule relating to:
the notices required for branch meetings;
the voting of a branch delegate at the Union's Council;
the election of a National Executive Committee member;
the attendance of a trustee at a National Executive Committee; and
a rule change relating to sections of the union.
Two of these complaints were upheld, two were dismissed and one was struck out by the Certification Officer under section 256ZA(4) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. The Certification Officer did not make any enforcement orders.
22 May 2015
National Association of Colliery Overmen, Deputies and Shotfirers (South Wales Area) has been removed from the schedule of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer because it dissolved on 22 May 2015.
The claimant brought five complaints against Unite the Union. The complaints alleged breaches of rule relating to the complainant being prevented from speaking to the National Industrial Sector Committees of the Union and the handling of her complaints relating to the issue. The Certification Officer struck out all five complaints under section 256ZA of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 on the grounds that the complaints had no reasonable prospect of success and/or were otherwise misconceived.
The claimant made a complaint alleging that UNISON breached its rules in removing him from membership. The claimant withdrew his complaint on the Union reinstating his membership. The Certification Officer dismissed the complaint upon withdrawal by the claimant.
The claimants brought five complaints against Unite the Union. One complaint related to eligibility to sit on its Executive Council and was upheld. The other four related to the Executive Council election in 2014 Two of these complaints were upheld and two were dismissed. The Certification Officer did not make any enforcement orders.
7 May 2015
An application to register the Instrument of Transfer of the Staff Association of Bank of Baroda (UK Region) to Unite the Union was received by the Certification Officer on 7 May 2015.
6 May 2015
The Certification Officer has approved an application from "Whatman Staff Association" to change its name to "Whatman International Staff Association" with effect from 6 May 2015.
5 May 2015
Unity merged into GMB on 16 April 2015. Please note that Unity ceased to exist from 15 April 2015 and has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer.
The complaint, as remitted to the Certification Officer by the Employment Appeal Tribunal, following the Certification Officer's decision (D/28-29/12-13) and EAT judgement (UKEAT/0256/13) was dismissed by the Certification Officer.
16 April 2015
European SOS Trade Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 13 April 2015.
26 February 2015
Newspaper Society has been removed from the list of employers' associations maintained by the Certification Officer because it ceased to exist on 16 June 2014.
11 February 2015
Notice is hereby given that that an application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from the National Crime Officers Association. Any person who wishes to submit any information relevant to this application should do so within one calendar month of the date of this notice.
9 February 2015
Equality For Workers Union (EFWU) has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 09 February 2015.
23 January 2015
The application for a certificate of independence from the Independent Workers Union of Great Britain (IWGB) was approved by the Certification Officer on 23 January 2015.
20 January 2015
R&C Trade Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 20 January 2015.
25 November 2014
Notice is hereby given that that an application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from the Independent Workers Union of Great Britain (IWGB). Any person who wishes to submit any information relevant to this application should do so within one calendar month of the date of this notice.
21 November 2014
Yorkshire Independent Staff Association (YISA) merged into Aegis the Union on 21 November 2014. Please note that YISA ceased to exist from 20 November and has been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer.
19 November 2014
Driver and General Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 18 November 2014.
3 November 2014
Artists' Union England has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 3 November 2014.
The Instrument of Transfer in respect of the merger of the British Association of Colliery Management - Technical Energy and Administrative Management (BACM-TEAM) to Prospect was registered by the Certification Officer on 3 November 2014. The Instrument comes into effect on 3 November 2014.
BACM-TEAM ceased to exist with effect from the date of registration of the Instrument and its name has been removed the Certification Officer's list of trade unions.
29 October 2014
Driver and General Union has been entered on the schedule of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 29 October 2014.
22 October 2014
Aberdeen Fish Curers & Merchants Association Ltd has been removed from the schedule of employers' associations maintained by the Certification Officer because it dissolved on 19 September 2014.
3 October 2014
An application to register the Instrument of Transfer of YISA (Yorkshire Independent Staff Association) to Aegis was received by the Certification Officer on 3 October 2014.
17 September 2014
An application to register the Instrument of Transfer of British Association of Colliery Management - Technical Energy and Administrative Management (BACM-TEAM) to Prospect was received by the Certification Officer on 17 September 2014.
13 August 2014
Artists' Union England has been entered in the schedule of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 1 August 2014.
29 July 2014
PTSC has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 29 July 2014.
22 July 2014
London Fish Merchant Association (Billingsgate) Limited has been removed from the schedule of employers' associations held by the Certification Officer with effect from 22 July 2014 because it is no longer an employers' association.
4 July 2014
Covent Garden Tenants Association Ltd has been removed from the schedule of employers' associations held by the Certification Officer with effect from 2 July 2014 because it is no longer an employers' association
25 March 2014
The application for a certificate of independence from the PPU was approved by the Certification Officer on 25 March 2014.
13 January 2014
Notice is hereby given that that an application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from PPU. Any persons who wishes to submit any information relevant to this application should do so within one calendar month of the date of this notice.
Certification Officer's decision in North v UNISON added
New complaints procedure published
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Blackburn v Unite the Union
removals from the list of trade unions
British Association of Dental Nurses merged into Community on 23 June 2026.
Application for a certificate of independence under received from Equality for Workers Union (EFWU)
The Certification Officer is launching a new online service to modernise casework
An application for a certificate of independence under section 6 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 has been received from Workers Voice Union.
New Certification Officer decision published - Barnes & Dench v TSSA
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Rawlins v BMA
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Chester v Unite the Union
A Certificate of Independence has been issued for UPECC
An application to register an Instrument of Transfer was received by the Certification Officer on 8 May 2026.
The Certification Officer has published his Office's objectives for 2026-2027
Certificate of Independence application received from UPECC
Certification Officer decisions issued in the cases of:
Farwell and UCU
McGaughey & Blake and UCU
Nesbitt and NASUWT
Certification Officer marks 50 years of independent oversight
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Alsaid v Unite the Union
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Gomes v Unite the Union
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Giire v UKPHD Union
CO Guidance update in light of the Employment Rights Act 2025
Future Funding Arrangements - Repeal of the CO levy on 1 April 2026
Important Update: Changes to Political Fund Rules under the Employment Rights Act 2025
New CO decision: Jurisdictional decision - McDonald and RMT
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Jama v UKPHD Union
New decision: Rachubinski and GMB
New Decision added: Casey v Unite the Union
Certification Officer's decision published in the case Roberts v UNISON
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Cortes v TSSA
Appointment of new Certification Officer for Trade Unions and Employers' Associations.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Fellica v UCU
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Sartin (2) v UNISON
Cleaners Union - added to the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer
First published.
Moosa v Unite the Union decision published
The Certification Officer's annual report for 2024-2025 has been laid before Parliament.
Care Workers Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 28 May 2025.
Appointment of an interim Certification Officer.
A Certificate of Independence has been issued to United Medical Associate Professionals Trade Union (UMAPs TU) by the Certification Officer.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Morley v UNISON
Application for a certificate of independence from Yourmate Union approved by the Certification Officer.
An application from United Medical Associate Professionals Trade Union (UMAPs TU) for a Certificate of Independence has been received by the Certification Officer.
Application received for a Certificate of Independence from Yourmate Union.
New Certification Officer decision: Aslam v App Drivers and Couriers Union
New Certification Officer decision issued:- Certification Officer v Fire Brigades Union
Certification Officer - announcement of retirement
Inspector's report issued: Fire Brigades Union
Leek United Building Society Staff Association was removed from the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 29 January 2025 because the organisation had dissolved.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Cassidy v Unite the Union
Boots Pharmacists' Association (BPA) merged into PDA Union on 1 January 2025 and has therefore been removed from the list of trade unions maintained by the Certification Officer.
New Certification Officer decision issued: - Pinder v GMB
An application to register the Instrument of Transfer of Boots Pharmacists' Association (BPA) to PDA Union was received by the Certification Officer on 15 November 2024.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Embery (4) v Fire Brigades Union
Annual Report of the Certification Officer laid before Parliament
Yourmate Union has been entered on the list of trade unions
New decisions issued by the Certification Officer: Hensby v GMB and Burley v GMB
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Bhogal v National Education Union
Certification Officer new decision issued - Alam (2) v Unite the Union
Independent Oxfam Union has been entered on the list of trade unions
Decision issued: Evans v Prospect
Aircrew Officers Association Europe was removed from the list of trade unions
Decision issued: Lambe v Fire Brigades Union
Libertas Union has been added to the list of trade unions
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: International Alliance of App-Based Transport Workers
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Dent v National Education Union
New Certification Officer decision:- Embery (3) v FBU
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Popplestone v Royal College of Nursing
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Sartin v UNISON
Scottish Engineering has been removed from the list of employers' associations
Union of Pilots, Engineers & Cabin Crew (UPECC) has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer with effect from 20 October 2023
PTSC has been removed from the Certification Officer's list of Trade Unions on 6 October 2023 because it no longer meets the statutory definition of a Trade Union.
The National Association of Farriers, Blacksmiths and Agricultural Engineers has been removed from the Certification Officer's list of Employers' Associations on 27 September because it no longer meets the statutory definition of an Employers' Association.
Autonomous Workers' Union (AW Union) has been removed from the Certification Officer's list of Trade Union on 14 August 2023 because it no longer meets the statutory definition of a Trade Union.
CO announces achievement in obtaining IIP Gold accreditation
The Certification Officer's Annual Report 2022-2023 published
Empower The Workers' Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer.
Security Industry Federation added to the list of trade unions
New CO decision - Simpson v Unite the Union
National Employees Union and The Women's Rugby Association have been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer.
Stage Directors U.K. Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer
New decision of the Certification Officer: Dawes v Royal College of Nursing (RCN)
New CO decision: Dawes v Royal College of Nursing (RCN)
Solid Trade Union: application for a certificate of independence approved
Application for a certificate of independence received from Solid Trade Union
New Certification Officer decision issued: McKay v UNISON
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Eager v Equity
Solid Trade Union has been entered on the list of trade unions held by the Certification Officer
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Taylor v NASUWT
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Sidhu v National Education Union
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Lowe v National Education Union
Certification Officer's Annual Report published
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Evans (2) v Prospect
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Dawes v Royal College of Nursing of the United Kingdom
New powers for the Certification Officer from 1 April 2022.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Embery v Fire Brigades Union
new CO decision- Embery v Fire Brigades Union (2)
Certification Officer: Implementation of the remaining provisions of the Trade Union Act 2016
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Meechan & Others v British Air Line Pilots Association
New CO decision: Morley v Unison
New CO decision: Embery v FBU
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Watkins v British Medical Association
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Foden v National Education Union
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Morley v Unison
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:-Wilson v Unison
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Parry v USDAW
New Certification Officer decision: Kelly v Musicians' Union
New CO decision- Morley v GMB
CO Annual Report deposited in Parliament
Implementation of the remaining Certification Officer powers under the Trade Union Act 2016 announced today by BEIS
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: McFadden v Unite the Union
A New CO decision.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Hussain v Communication Workers Union (2) (Part 2)
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Jennings v GMB
Information regarding The Workers' Union
New CO Decision Kidd v Musicians' Union
Breach of union rules decision: Singh v University College Union (UCU) published
Decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Alam v Unite the Union
New decision: Simpson v Unite the Union
news alert
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Dunbobbin v UNISON
New decision- Simpson v Unite the Union (4)
The Annual Report of the Certification Officer, was laid before Parliament on 9 July 2020
New decision
Certification Office's Operational Plan for 2020-2021 published
Certification Office update
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: St John v Unite the Union
new CO decision
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- [Crew v Aegis the Union]
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Jones v UNISON
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Dunham v Society of Radiographers
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Hussain v CWU (2) (Part 1)
New decisions issued by the Certification Officer:- Watkins v British Medical Association/ Parlour v NASUWT
Certification Officer's Annual Report published
Political funds decision: Oley & Others v Unite the Union: (D/12/19-20
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Watkins v British Medical Association
Delay in publication of CO annual report
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Tavsanoglu v GMB
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Bell v Unite the Union
new CO decision
new CO decision
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Simpson v Unite the Union
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: - Dosanjh v POA
New decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Dosanjh v POA
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Bromfield v GMB
New Decision issued by the Certification Officer:- Newton v Musicians Union
new decision
New decision issued - Morley v GMB
New Certification Officer decision - Kelly v Musicians' Union
New decision by the Certification Officer
Lanarkshire Master Plumbers' Association has been removed from the schedule of employers' associations.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer (Blackledge v University and College Union)
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Lascelles v Prospect
Hussain v CWU - new decision issued
new CO decision
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New CO decision
New decision issued by the Assistant Certification Officer
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer
Announcement on the publication of the Certification Officer's Annual Report
New decision by the Certification Officer
New decision issued by the Certification Officer - Dinsdale v GMB
New decision issued by the Certification Officer (Cullen v Unite the Union)
New decision in the case of Coyne & Brooks v Unite the Union issued by the Assistant Certification Officer.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
Decision for Chisholm v Unite the Union
new decision
New decision issued by the Assistant Certification Officer.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer
An error in the wording has been amended
New decision issued by the Certification Officer
New Decision issued by the Certification Officer
Findings letter published in relation to allegations of financial irregularities relating to National Union of Mineworkers (Northumberland Area)
New decision issued by the Certification Officer
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New Decision by the Assistant Certification Officer
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer
New decision issued by the Certification Officer
New decision issued by the Certification Officer
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Beaumont v Unite the Union (No.5)
new CO decision
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Bannister v UNISON: The Public Service Union
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Brough v Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians (UCATT) (No. 2).
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Forbes v Scottish Secondary Teachers' Association.
The Annual Report of the Certification Officer (2015-2016) is today published and laid before Parliament. It is available to be downloaded from the Certification Officer's website.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New decision of the Certification Officer
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New decision published by the Certification Officer
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Radford v Equity (No.2)
Ritson v NUT: Following a settlement agreement between the parties, Mr Ritson withdrew his application, which was dismissed by the Certification Officer upon withdrawal. The hearing set for 21 October 2015 has been vacated. The Certification Officer's decision is available on his website.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer.
The Annual Report of the Certification Officer (2014-2015) is published and laid before Parliament today. It is available to be downloaded from the Certification Officer's website. Hard copies of the report are available upon request to the Certification Office (info@certoffice.org).
New Decision issued by the Certification Officer.
New Decision issued by the Certification Officer.
Three new decisions issued by the Certification Officer.
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Groves (2) v Society of Authors
New decision issued by the Certification Officer: Singh v Unite the Union
Singh v Unite the Union (18/03/2015): Mr Singh alleged that Unite the Union breached its rules in relation to his alleged removal from office. The Certification Officer dismissed the complaint.
New Decision issued by the Certification Officer: Beaumont (3) v Unite the Union
Lastest decision by the Certification Officer: Barton v UNISON (23 January 2015).
New Decision issued by the Certification Officer: Illingworth v National Union of Teachers (NUT)
Sweeney v Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians (UCATT): Decision issued by the Certification Officer on 28 November 2014.