The Minister for Housing and Local Government, Baroness Taylor OBE, has extended Neil Sachdev's tenure as Chair of HM Land Registry Board for another four years. The extension ensures continuity of experienced leadership for the Land Registry Board.
HM Land Registry Chair, Neil Sachdev MBE, said:
I am delighted and proud to be continuing in my role as Chair of the HM Land Registry and supporting the organisation and Board in further delivering our Strategy 2025+ published last year.
Our role is now more vital than ever as we play a key role in supporting government ambitions and enabling a better, faster and less stressful property market for all. Our values are to have integrity, drive innovation, be professional and give assurance. Since being appointed in 2022, I have seen how these values have informed our focus on serving our customers, enabling trusted data, supporting investment and helping communities grow.
I've been delighted with the determined effort of our 7,000+ expert colleagues to improve our service and with their willingness to truly engage with our customers and put their needs first. Their commitment and professionalism have been central to the strong, tangible progress made. I very much look forward to continuing my role with such a dedicated team, meeting the challenges of today and the opportunities of tomorrow.
HM Land Registry Chief Executive and Chief Land Registrar, Iain Banfield, said:
Neil has brought a wealth of leadership experience, insight, business acumen and constructive challenge to HM Land Registry. The extension of his appointment to 2030 is an important and welcome moment for our organisation, providing continuity and stability as we continue to deliver our Strategy 2025+ and navigate a period of significant organisational change and transformation.
Neil is passionate about our public purpose, committed to improving the service for our customers, and a strong advocate for creating an environment where our people can thrive and deliver their best work. I know his leadership and support will help guide us through this next stage in our history, ensuring we focus on strengthening the significant progress made in recent years, delivering the best outcomes for our customers, and working collaboratively across government and industry to improve the property market for all.