DVLA's Service Desk team provides front-line support to colleagues across the agency, providing them with the services they need to do their roles to the best of their ability and as an interface into wider IT service management.
SDI's World Class status is an internationally accepted global best practice standard for Service Desk. It recognises organisations that have successfully embedded service excellence into their culture, where leadership inspires continual improvement, people are empowered to innovate, customers become advocates, and service management is recognised as a strategic contributor to organisational success.
Of the 7 organisations globally that hold a 5-star certification, DVLA becomes the first and only government body, putting it on-par with leading private sector organisations.
Tim Moss CBE, Chief Executive of DVLA, said:
This is a truly outstanding achievement and a testament to the dedication and professionalism of everyone in our Service Desk team. Being recognised as a World Class service desk, and the first government organisation in the world to reach this standard, reflects our ongoing commitment to supporting our colleagues across DVLA, ensuring they have what they need to continue delivering excellent services for our customers.
Paul Rodrigues, SDI's Chair and Chief Executive, said:
DVLA Service Desk has demonstrated that public sector organisations can set standards that others aspire to achieve. This accreditation challenges outdated perceptions of government services and establishes a new benchmark for operational excellence across the public sector, both within the United Kingdom and internationally.
DVLA Service Desk has not simply joined the community of World Class organisations, it has set a new standard for what World Class looks like in government.
The 5-star World Class certification builds on DVLA's wider commitment to continual improvement and digital transformation. The agency will work in partnership with the SDI to maintain this standard, ensuring that its Service Desk remains at the forefront of excellence and continues to play its part in helping deliver reliable, high-quality services for the millions of customers and organisations that rely on DVLA every year.