Moiz Moghal
Appointed from 1 August 2026 to 31 July 2030
Dr Moiz Moghal is a Consultant in Sport and Exercise Medicine with extensive experience across the NHS, independent healthcare, and elite sport. He has held senior medical leadership roles, including Chief Medical Officer for GB and England Hockey and Lead Physician for the England Men's Cricket Team.
Throughout his career, Dr Moghal has supported athletes competing at the highest level, including at the Olympic and Paralympic Games, The Ashes, and the Wimbledon Championships. His expertise spans athlete health, performance, welfare, and clinical governance.
In addition to his clinical leadership, Dr Moghal has contributed to research, medical education, and quality improvement, with publications in peer-reviewed journals.
Caitlin Notley
Appointed from 1 July 2026 to 30 June 2030
Professor Caitlin Notley is an internationally recognised research leader specialising in understanding addictive behaviours and developing and testing interventions to reduce harm. She leads the Public Health Research Department and the Addiction Research Group at the Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia. As a social scientist, her research expertise spans clinical trials, process evaluation, and applied mixed methods. She has a particular passion for research with health inclusion groups and vulnerable populations.
George Walker
Reappointed from 5 September 2026 to 4 September 2030.
George Walker is a Chartered Accountant and has held a number of senior finance and IT leadership positions within international organisations, mainly focusing on digitally-driven business change. He has been a Board member of UKAD since 2022 where he is also the Chair of the Audit & Risk Committee.
In addition, George is currently Chair of the Scottish Sports Futures charity and is the Independent Chair of the Audit & Risk Committee at Scottish Swimming.
Previously he was a Board member of Sportscotland from April 2013 to April 2022, a period that included supporting the first Glasgow Commonwealth Games in 2014 and the redevelopment of the Inverclyde National Centre into the first fully accessible residential sports centre in the UK.
Alison O'Riordan
Reappointed from 5 September 2026 to 4 September 2030.
Associate Professor Alison O'Riordan is an internationally respected sports professional, educator, researcher, and leader with more than 30 years of experience across high-performance sport, coaching, athlete development, and governance. Recognised globally for her expertise in Paralympic and disability sport, she has dedicated over two decades to advancing Para sport.
Dr O'Riordan has coached athletes to six Paralympic Games representing Australia, Great Britain, and Ireland. She has held leadership and consultancy roles with organisations including the Australian Institute of Sport, Athletics Australia, England Athletics, British Athletics, Paralympics Ireland, and UK Anti-Doping.
Dr O'Riordan holds a PhD in biomechanics and is widely regarded as a world leader in seated throws research, with an extensive publication record and international speaking profile.
Remuneration and Governance Code
UK Anti-Doping Board Members are remunerated at £215 per day and are expected to attend 6 board meetings a year.
This appointment has been made in accordance with the Cabinet Office's Governance Code on Public Appointments. The appointments process is regulated by the Commissioner for Public Appointments. Under the Code, any significant political activity undertaken by an appointee in the last five years must be declared. This is defined as including holding office, public speaking, making a recordable donation, or candidature for election.