Attorney General swearing-in speech: Rt Hon Ellie Reeves KC MP
Full text of the speech given by the Rt Hon Ellie Reeves KC MP as she was sworn in as Attorney General at the Royal Courts of Justice.
My Lady Chief Justice, Lord Chancellor, members of the Court.
It is an honour to take my oath this morning.
It was less than a year ago I was being sworn in as Solicitor General.
It was a job I loved, and gave me an insight into the talent, the dedication and the professionalism of the people who work in the department.
The Attorney General's Office is a place where we get things done.
So, while I am new to this role, I am not new to the work, and I am pleased to drive it forward.
I want to take a moment to recognise the judiciary and the extraordinary work you do.
You uphold the rule of law with independence and integrity, often in the most difficult and sensitive circumstances.
I will work hard to protect this independence, which is at the core of our justice system.
I look forward to working closely with you, Lady Chief Justice, and with judges across our courts, to strengthen public confidence in our justice system.
I also want to take a moment to pay tribute to Richard Hermer.
It was a privilege to serve alongside him. I learnt a lot from him and owe him a debt of gratitude.
And I am really pleased to have Andy Slaughter as our Solicitor General.
I could not think of a better person to have in the role.
His longstanding experience of Parliament and the criminal justice system will serve him, and all of us, extremely well.
Andy, you often say you've only waited 21 years for your appointment.
I think that confirms that you possess two qualities essential for any Law Officer: remarkable patience and an admirable refusal to give up.
And it is a genuine relief to know I will now have you beside me at the Justice Select Committee rather than the other side of the table, asking the difficult questions.
Having served both as the Shadow Solicitor General and as Chair of the Justice Select Committee, I cannot think of a better person to have in this important role.
And of course, it's a privilege to see our new Lord Chancellor in post.
He and I were elected to Parliament on the same day, just over nine years ago.
As a Minister in the Home Office, Alex had to grapple with some of the most difficult challenges facing our government.
He tackled those issues with determination, respect and thoughtfulness. As Lord Chancellor he'll show those same qualities.
And I know how committed he is to the rule of law and ensuring that our justice system delivers for ordinary people.
Lady Chief Justice, you touched on my own journey into law.
It is true that growing up I didn't know any lawyers.
I went to my local South East London comprehensive and when I was around 17 I distinctively remember saying to my dad that I might want to study law at university, maybe even become a barrister, but I didn't think that was something girls like me from schools like mine did.
Dad - I still remember your words today. You said, "Well Ellie, if you don't do it, how will things ever change!"
And Mum and Mike, your words were just as impactful, you both thought I should apply because, and I quote: "you love arguing with people, so you may as well get paid for it."
So, with that ringing endorsement, off I went to Oxford University to study law.
In one of my earliest seminars, our professor told my class we were practically guaranteed a training contract in a magic circle law firm, but I knew that wasn't why I was studying law.
There is nothing wrong with that work, but I wanted to be able to make a difference to people's everyday lives.
So, after being called to the bar in 2004, I trained as an employment rights lawyer, representing trade unions and their members for over a decade, before setting up my own consultancy, to support women facing maternity and sex discrimination at work.
Representing people at work taught me that law doesn't exist in a vacuum.
It's people's pay packets, it's their livelihoods, it's their safety and their dignity at work.
The law makes a real difference to people's lives.
And that's what has shaped my work in law, and in Parliament, and will continue to do so in this role, as Attorney General.
As Solicitor General, I made tackling violence against women and girls my number one priority.
I was proud to be able to help design and publish the Government's VAWG strategy;
To unlock five million pounds for the CPS to better support domestic abuse victims in the crown courts and roll out the early Victims Right to Review scheme.
And as Attorney General just this week I have announced the national roll out of the Victim Transformation Programme, including dedicated victim liaison officers for victims of domestic abuse.
That is progress, but there are more challenges we still face.
Public confidence in our criminal justice system is low, and there is much more to do to deliver for victims.
I will work closely with the Lord Chancellor and Home Secretary to make sure we do.
I know there is impatience. People want government to get things done. And done now.
That's why, a few weeks ago, I changed the Legal Risk Guidance.
I want to empower our brilliant government lawyers to find creative and innovative solutions, support ministers to take legally sound decisions that stand up to scrutiny.
And crucially, I want them to enable this Government to deliver for ordinary people.
Lady Chief Justice, to swear this oath today is an honour and a great responsibility.
As Attorney General, I will work to uphold the rule of law, strengthen confidence in our justice system, and ensure the law continues to serve the people it exists to help.
The legal profession should be open to everyone, regardless of their background.
If there is one bit of advice I could give any aspiring lawyers thinking the profession might not be for them, it would be this. Follow your dreams and don't let barriers get in the way, instead: strive to break them down.
And as Attorney General, I will work to break down those barriers, increase opportunity and help widen access to our brilliant profession.