The Secretary of State for Business and Trade is delighted to announce that Kate Harrisson has been appointed His Majesty's Trade Commissioner (HMTC) for China and Hong Kong, and will take up the role in September.
Kate joins from the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, where she currently serves as the FCDO's Director for the Asia Pacific; until recently she was Head of the FCDO's China Department.
Having worked in the private sector in China, Kate joined the Foreign Office in 2000. Her earlier roles in the FCDO include postings as British Ambassador in Peru, Deputy Head of Mission in Vietnam, and roles in Beijing and Hong Kong. In FCDO HQ she has worked on the UK's relations with India, UK policy on refugees and conflict prevention. Outside government, Kate completed a two-year secondment to Arup between 2022-2024 as Strategy Director Emerging Markets.
Kate's appointment follows the recent the UK-China Joint Economic and Trade Commission (JETCO), co-chaired by Secretary of State for Business and Trade, Peter Kyle, and Chinese Minister of Commerce Wang Wentao, at Mansion House on 2 July. The JETCO built on the Prime Minister's visit to China in January 2026, which pushed forward £2.2 billion in export deals and around £2.3 billion in market access opportunities for UK businesses over 5 years.
Kate Harrison said:
I am delighted to have been appointed as HMTC for China and Hong Kong and to be returning to this dynamic region. Since my first visit to China over thirty years ago, the pace and scale of change and the intensity of global competition has been dramatic.
As technological innovation accelerates, it's vital that the UK supports our businesses to succeed in the world's second largest economy and to leverage that experience outside of it. I'm excited to be joining a team that is dedicated to delivering secure and resilient growth for the whole of the United Kingdom, creating jobs today and ensuring our competitiveness for the future.
Kate replaces Lewis Neal, who took up the role in September 2023.
Lewis Neal said:
It has been a privilege to serve as HM Trade Commissioner for China and Hong Kong. With thanks to the team in market and in the UK, we have secured new market access for British firms, supported new exporters and attracted investment into the UK.
The first in-person trade talks and Prime Ministerial visit in eight years set the direction for a long-term, consistent and comprehensive trading relationship. Working with world-leading UK and Chinese companies has been a career-defining experience. Supporting British business and driving investment that creates jobs and growth never stops. I wish Kate Harrisson every success when she takes up the role.
Role of the HM Trade Commissioner (HMTC) for China and Hong Kong
The HM Trade Commissioner (HMTC) for China and Hong Kong cooperates closely with the wider diplomatic network and other colleagues to coordinate the government effort overseas to promote UK trade and prosperity.
The Trade Commissioner has full responsibility for all Department for Business and Trade (DBT) work in China and Hong Kong including:
- Growing the overall trade and investment relationship
- Improving market access for British companies, including small and medium sized businesses (SMEs)
- Developing trade policy
The HMTC works closely with UK-based government colleagues, UK ambassadors and the wider diplomatic network in the region to deliver these goals.