Russia's intensifying attacks on Ukraine speak louder than its claims to want peace: UK statement at the UN Security Council
Statement by Ambassador Sarah MacIntosh, UK Permanent Representative to the UN, at the UN Security Council meeting on Ukraine.
Two weeks ago, we heard Presidents, Prime Ministers, and Foreign Ministers in the General Assembly and in this Chamber calling for de-escalation and an end to Russia's war against Ukraine.
Today, the Security Council meets on Ukraine again.
Because Russia's attacks on Ukraine have intensified again.
Yesterday, British Foreign Secretary Ed Miliband was in Chernihiv in Ukraine.
He saw and described Russia's "barbaric war of terror on the Ukrainian people".
Yesterday, a Russian glide bomb killed at least 33 civilians travelling on a bus in Kramatorsk.
On Wednesday, Russian airstrikes killed at least 30 civilians.
22, including five children, when a cruise missile flattened a residential building in Chernihiv.
And on Tuesday, two Ukrainian Red Cross workers were injured trying to support victims of a Russian attack in the Zaporizhzhia region.
These are 3 days of the 1,688 days since Russia's full-scale invasion.
And I could go on.
Russian strikes on Black Sea ports and merchant shipping threaten global food supplies.
In central Kyiv this week, Russian drones have hit civilian bridges in broad daylight.
And hundreds of drones and missiles strike Ukraine's electricity and heating infrastructure everyday.
Thousands of civilians are reported to be trapped within Russian-occupied Oleshky, short of food, water, and medical care, and without access to essential services.
Even the Kremlin describes this situation as 'critical'.
Under International Humanitarian Law, an Occupying Power must ensure access to adequate food, medical supplies, and healthcare.
Where that is not the case, it must allow and facilitate rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief.
Yet, as Ukrainians approach winter, the Russian Ministry of Defence posted on social media that Ukrainians would "freeze" this winter.
And in rejecting an energy ceasefire, the Kremlin called Ukraine's energy system an "Achilles heel".
Directly targeting civilian infrastructure may constitute a war crime.
The United Kingdom calls on Russia to follow her obligations under international law.
Russia is not only destroying homes, infrastructure, and lives.
Nearly five years on from the initial invasion, Russia is seeking to make the unacceptable appear routine.
But the frequency of Russia's attacks cannot be allowed to dull our sense of urgency.
Russia could end this war tomorrow.
Instead, Russia escalates her attacks.
We should all respond accordingly.
By taking measures that constrain Russia's ability to sustain this war.
This week the United Kingdom announced 38 new designations on those supplying Russia's military with critical goods.
And by pressing Russia to accept an immediate and unconditional ceasefire.
President Zelenskyy has made clear time and again Ukraine's willingness to accept a ceasefire.
President Putin has refused a ceasefire, and intensified attacks.
These actions speak louder than any claims to want peace.
As Foreign Secretary Miliband said yesterday in Kyiv, the United Kingdom stands with the people of Ukraine.
And until Russia chooses the path of peace, we will not relent on our support for Ukraine or for our values.