Chief Construction and Scientific Adviser appointed to improve building safety
New Chief Construction and Scientific Adviser appointed to provide expert, independent advice on building safety and regulatory reform.
The government has taken further steps to improve the building safety system, announcing the appointment of an independent Chief Construction and Scientific Adviser as the Building Safety Levy comes into force.
Sergio Cavalaro, Professor of Infrastructure Systems at Loughborough University's School of Architecture, Building and Civil Engineering, has been appointed as the Chief Construction and Scientific Adviser (CCSA) on a three-year term.
The new position is strategically positioned as part of the wider scientific adviser network across government, recognising the important role of both the construction and scientific sectors for building safety reform.
It is just one of the recommendations in the Inquiry report being implemented by government following the tragedy of the Grenfell Tower fire in 2017, which took the lives of 72 people and exposed profound failings in building safety.
The CCSA will provide independent construction, engineering and scientific advice on the safety, quality and resilience of buildings, as well as on productivity across the built environment sector.
Minister for Building Safety, Fire and Resilience, Baroness Blake said:
Delivering safer buildings and protecting residents from costs remains our priority as we drive forward our building safety reforms, and the Building Safety Levy is a key part of that mission.
I'm also thrilled to confirm the appointment of the Chief Construction and Scientific Adviser - Sergio will play a vital role in shaping our reforms to ensure safety, robust regulation and high standards are at the core of the built environment sector.
The CCSA will also support the delivery of the remaining Inquiry recommendations and regulatory reform, acting as a bridge between government, regulators, industry, professional and trade bodies, academia and residents.
He will take on the role on a full-time basis, working closely with the Interim Chief Construction Adviser, Thouria Istephan, over the next month to ensure a thorough handover period.
Chief Construction and Scientific Adviser, Sergio Cavalaro said:
I am delighted to join MHCLG as Chief Construction and Scientific Adviser. I am committed to working with the Building Safety Regulator and across the wider sector to improve the safety, quality, resilience and productivity of the built environment.
I look forward to providing independent advice and constructive challenge, while contributing to cross-government priorities through the network of Chief Scientific Advisers.
In addition, the Building Safety Levy - a tax on new eligible residential developments over 10 units - came into force on 1st October.
The funds raised through the levy will support important building safety works, forming a key part of the government's approach to ensure the industry contributes to fixing building safety defects, while protecting leaseholders and taxpayers.
It's expected to raise around £3.4 billion over the next ten years - providing vital funding to remove dangerous cladding and keep residents safe.
The updates confirmed today form a key part of the government's mission to improve the building safety system and enable everyone to feel confident in the safety of their home.
Government Chief Scientific Adviser Professor Dame Angela McLean said:
Congratulations to Professor Sergio Cavalaro on being appointed as the Chief Construction and Scientific Adviser at MHCLG. He has led scientific research on several key areas related to the built environment. I look forward to working with him as part of the cross-government network of chief scientists, where his expertise will be of great value."
The Building Safety Regulator Chair, Lord Roe said:
In the Building Safety Regulator (BSR), we welcome the appointment of Sergio to this critical role. I look forward to engaging him on the work of the BSR so that we can benefit from his extensive experience in the built environment.
Notes to editors:
- Sergio was appointed through an open Civil Service recruitment process. He will work full time.
- The Building Safety Levy applies to new building control applications on eligible new residential developments and eligible purpose-built student accommodation. It came into force on 1 October 2026.
Biography of Professor Sergio Cavalaro
Professor Sergio Cavalaro is a civil engineer with a PhD in construction engineering. He has supported government and industry on issues of national significance and has extensive knowledge of regulatory systems in the UK and internationally. Notably, he played a central role in the structural evaluations of Reinforced Autoclaved Aerated Concrete (RAAC), advancing the sector's understanding, informing measures to keep hospitals operational during the COVID-19 pandemic, and contributing to the subsequent national response. He has also led collaborative initiatives to advance modern methods of construction, repair and remediation approaches, materials and quality control methods that are now helping to improve safety, quality and productivity in buildings and infrastructure.