On 12 August, 4 studies produced by ORE Catapult, the United Kingdom's leading innovation centre for offshore renewable energy, will be presented at the British Ambassador's Residence in Santiago. The studies provide recommendations to support the development of offshore wind energy in Chile.
The event will be opened by the British Ambassador to Chile, David Concar, and will include a presentation of the main findings of the studies, followed by a panel discussion entitled "Next Steps for Offshore Wind in Chile". Panellists will include representatives from the Ministry of Energy, InvestChile, Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez and the Centre for the Transition towards Resilient and Autonomous Electric Systems (CENTRA).
Report findings
The findings show that Chile has exceptional conditions to develop a competitive offshore wind industry. A range of complementary actions will be needed to translate this potential into concrete projects. Key actions identified include strengthening regulatory and permitting frameworks, enhancing coordination among public institutions, ensuring timely planning of electricity transmission infrastructure, and supporting the development of local capabilities, a skilled workforce and domestic supply chains.
The research also highlights the importance of adopting an integrated approach to sector development by aligning energy, port and spatial planning with a long-term strategy that provides certainty for investors and facilitates the delivery of future projects.
The reports identify significant opportunities for regional economic growth. In particular, it highlights the potential of offshore wind to revitalise strategic ports, attract new industrial investment and create highly skilled jobs, particularly in industrial regions such as Biobío.
Recommendations
The recommendations are informed by the United Kingdom's experience, site visits, and consultations with stakeholders from both countries. They cover key areas for sector development, including ports, electricity transmission, maritime planning, energy policy, workforce development, environmental considerations and supply chains. The objective is to contribute to the creation of a competitive, scalable and attractive market for private investment.
The studies were developed by ORE Catapult as part of an initiative led by the British Embassy in Santiago and funded by the UK Department for Business, Innovation, Science and Trade.
Read the reports:
Spanish reports:
If you want to know more about these reports, please contact the British Embassy Santiago.
For more information about the activities of the British Embassy in Santiago, follow us on: