Space exploration and exports across the Atlantic were on the agenda as the Secretary of State for Scotland welcomed Floridian Governor Ron DeSantis to Edinburgh.
The Governor visited Scotland as part of a Select Florida trade delegation to the UK. This summer's World Cup saw Scotland forge links with the Sunshine State thanks to the Tartan Army adopting Miami as their temporary home, and now those links are set to grow as the Floridian delegation experienced the best Scotland has to offer.
Florida, which has a GDP roughly equivalent to that of Spain, has many opportunities for links with the Scottish economy - from shared expertise in space exploration to financial services and exporting goods.
Secretary of State for Scotland Douglas Alexander had the opportunity to discuss the potential for economic growth and partnership between Scotland and Florida at a reception at the Johnny Walker Experience in Edinburgh this evening [22 July].
Secretary of State for Scotland Douglas Alexander said:
The friendship between Scotland and Florida was clear to see over recent weeks when the Tartan Army was welcomed to Miami during the World Cup. That connection can now continue to grow with the endless opportunities for partnership.
From technology and tourism, to professional services and produce, there is great potential for economic and skills growth on both sides of the Atlantic. Discussing the shared interests Scotland and Florida have with Governor DeSantis was a great chance to cement the relationship with the US State.
The Select Florida delegation are getting the chance to experience the best Scotland has to offer and I hope that's only a taster of what could lie ahead for economic and cultural partnerships between the two.
British exports to Florida reached $3billion in 2024, with exports to the US expected to grow as tariffs on whisky are reduced to zero, as announced by President Donald Trump in April this year.
The UK's strong trading relationship with the USA is further demonstrated by being the only country to have secured a 10% tariff for autos within quota, saving hundreds of millions of pounds on UK exports annually and protecting an industry with hundreds of thousands of jobs, and to be the only country to benefit from a preferential 25% tariff on core steel and aluminium exports to the US.