Andy Burnham will tell small business owners he has their back as he continues his summer tour in the West Country tomorrow (Friday 14 August).
The Prime Minister is already helping pubs, social clubs and live music venues by cutting their business rates bills by 20%, which will deliver much needed savings for around 4,000 pubs in the South West and around 31,500 pubs in England.
He wants to build a fresh partnership between government and business built around a shared ambition to drive investment, create more opportunities and growth in every postcode.
In his first week in office, the PM put a new offer on the table for Britain's job creators focused on greater certainty, clearer long-term direction, faster decision-making and a stronger business voice in shaping policy.
This government will act as a circuit breaker, bringing down costs for businesses and removing barriers so they can focus on growing and creating jobs.
On the latest leg of his summer tour, he will discuss with people running small businesses in the West Country what they need to plan for the long term.
The Prime Minister has said he will support businesses who invest in their communities and give every young person a fair chance to find a good job. At the same time, he is taking action to stop the unchecked spread of vape stores and adult gaming centres that have eroded the identity of many town centres.
Prime Minister Andy Burnham said:
"Local businesses are the beating heart of our communities, bringing life to the places we call home.
"We are helping pubs, social clubs and live music venues by cutting their business rates, but I've always said there is more to do.
"I'm listening to small business owners so we can work together to deliver jobs and growth in every postcode."
Allen Simpson, Chief Executive of UKHospitality, said:
"Hospitality is how we will solve the youth employment crisis in every postcode and I'm pleased the Prime Minister will be seeing firsthand how hotels, pubs, cafes, hotels and restaurants are the foundation of our coastal and rural communities.
"It's encouraging that the Prime Minister is spending his first weeks in the role speaking with businesses and understanding what employers need to create jobs across the UK. I hope in the coming months we will see this sense of change continue."
Tina McKenzie, Interim National Chair of the Federation of Small Businesses said:
"Listening is welcome, and we are talking actively to the Prime Minister about how to put small businesses at the heart of decision-making, and the changes small businesses want to see in the upcoming Autumn Budget and 10-year Plan for Government.
"Our community hopes to build on the latest payments legislation we agreed with Labour in Opposition and delivered on with 10 Downing Street in power, which we hope will pass through Parliament quickly when MPs and Peers return - and we are grateful for the signals set out so far that the PM understands the pressures small businesses are under on rates and the high cost of employing people. Listening and then acting is the only way we will get hope back into our economy and growth in every postcode."