Flicking the switch to heat Seaham homes with mine water energy
Mine water heat network goes live at Seaham Garden Village, delivering clean, secure and affordable heating to 750 homes from disused coal mines.
Families moving into new affordable homes at Seaham Garden Village are now benefiting from clean, secure and reasonably priced heating, powered by water from abandoned coal mines beneath their feet.
A new energy centre that will supply around 750 homes with low-carbon heat extracted from naturally warm mine water at the Mining Remediation Authority's Dawdon treatment scheme recently went live and has now successfully completed the commissioning phase, confirming the network is fully operational.
This is the latest mine water heat network to go live in Great Britain, delivering clean, secure, and reasonably priced heat to local communities by making use of mine water already being pumped to the surface. It's a significant step forward in repurposing the country's industrial heritage to benefit the people who live there today.
The scheme, a collaboration between the Mining Remediation Authority, Karbon Homes, Esh Group, Vital Energi and Durham County Council, delivers a clean, secure and stable source of heat for local communities by making use of a nationalised asset already in public ownership.
It also brings environmental benefits, with an estimated saving of 2,600 tonnes of CO2 annually, equating to nearly 65,000 tonnes of carbon emissions avoided over 25 years.
Mine water is naturally heated by geothermal processes deep underground and maintains a stable temperature year-round.
At Seaham, the existing Dawdon mine water treatment scheme now serves a dual purpose: protecting local drinking water supplies while providing renewable heat to homes.
The energy centre uses heat exchangers and a heat pump to extract and boost the heat from the mine water and distribute it through a district network. This delivers consistent, low-carbon heating and hot water to residents, helping protect families from volatile energy prices.
The 750 homes that will benefit from the scheme form part of Seaham Garden Village, a wider 1,500-home development on Durham's heritage coast. The heat network received funding through the government's Heat Networks Investment Project.
Andrew Simpson, head of Innovation, By-Products and Services Delivery at the Mining Remediation Authority, said:
It is exciting to see our Dawdon mine water treatment scheme successfully transition to dual use, continuing to safeguard water while now supplying sustainable heat to local homes.
Seaham Garden Village shows how geothermal energy from disused mines can be replicated across the country.
This project is proof of how innovation and partnership can unlock clean, affordable heating for communities today.
Rob Callaghan, managing director at Vital Community Energi, said:
I am proud that Seaham Garden Village will operate under our complete Energy Services Company (ESCo), marking another significant milestone in the expansion of our owned and operated heat networks.
As with all our ESCo projects, customers remain our top priority. That is why we have ensured residents benefit from stable and efficient heating and hot water, delivering lasting benefits into a community directly affected by the closure of the mines.
Sarah Robson, executive director of development and asset management at Karbon Homes, said:
Lowering the carbon footprint of our homes and operations, whilst also positively impacting the lives of our customers is really important to us. Residents have been moving in since the beginning of the year, and they are delighted with their new homes and the mine water heating.
Councillor Kyle Genner, cabinet member for neighbourhoods, environment and police relations at Durham County Council, said:
We're really pleased to have helped facilitate this scheme which will ensure that people can live in affordable homes at Seaham Garden Village.
This project makes impressive use of the legacy left by our coal mining heritage, using mine water to create a heat network supplying heat and hot water to around 750 homes.
This is an exciting emerging option for heating our homes, and we're looking closely to see where else it might be viable in the future.
An estimated 25% of Great Britain's homes and businesses are located above former coal mines, creating significant potential for similar schemes across Britain's coalfield communities.
The Mining Remediation Authority operates more than 80 mine water treatment schemes nationwide, many of which could be adapted to provide renewable heat.
This project builds on successful mine water heating schemes already operating in Gateshead and Wales, demonstrating how former mining regions can lead the transition to clean energy.
By harnessing locally available geothermal resources, these communities are reducing carbon emissions while creating employment opportunities in green technology.
The scheme supports the government's Plan for Change mission to make Britain a clean energy superpower, working towards at least 95% clean power generation by 2030 while protecting billpayers and creating good jobs across the country.
Anyone interested in exploring mine water heat opportunities can find out more and get in touch with the Mining Remediation Authority's Heat and By-Product Innovation Team at HeatandBy-ProductInnovationTeam@coal.gov.uk.
For media enquiries contact the community response team
For emergency media enquiries (out of hours) call: 0800 288 4242.
Only urgent media calls will be attended to.