Joint Statement from Defence Ministers of the Joint Expeditionary Force: 02 October 2026
Defence Ministers of the Joint Expeditionary Force (JEF) and Allies met at Keflavik Air Base, Iceland, today (02 October) to advance the JEF's role as a key pillar of European and Euro-Atlantic security.
Defence Ministers of the Joint Expeditionary Force (JEF) and Allies met at Keflavik Air Base, Iceland, today (02 October) to advance the JEF's role as a key pillar of European and Euro-Atlantic security. Following guidance from Leaders at the Helsinki Summit in March, Ministers agreed upon further action across the JEF's key priorities.
1. Reinforcing steadfast support to Ukraine through ambitious delivery of the JEF-Ukraine Enhanced Partnership.
The JEF Nations remain steadfast in their support for Ukraine. In 2025, the JEF-Ukraine Enhanced Partnership was established to deepen cooperation and strengthen collective security. Today, Defence Minister Khamara virtually joined JEF counterparts to mark the successful ongoing delivery of that Partnership. This year, for the first time, Ukraine participated in the JEF's flagship Lion Protector exercise, with Ukrainian mine countermeasure vessels operating alongside JEF forces to strengthen interoperability, enabling the JEF to benefit from Ukraine's unrivalled operational experience of modern warfare. Defence Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to the Partnership and agreed to deepen Ukraine's involvement in JEF activities.
2. To further leverage the JEF's specific geographical focus and collective expertise in operating in the Arctic, High North, North Atlantic and Baltic Sea regions to strengthen NATO's northern flank
Defence Ministers reaffirmed that the Baltic Sea region, the High North, and the North Atlantic remain the JEF's core and interconnected area of strategic interest. Joined by Canadian Defence Minister McGuinty, Ministers discussed opportunities to deepen cooperation between the JEF and Canada, noted Canada's application to join the Framework, and advanced work towards a shared recommendation to JEF Leaders on Canadian membership.
Ministers also agreed the JEF's overarching policy direction and a common framework for structuring engagement with partners.
3. To further increase the JEF's deterrence and peacetime activity.
Defence Ministers received an update on the Lion Protector series, conducted across Iceland and Norway this autumn, and welcomed its synchronisation with the UK's Carrier Strike Group. Ministers reviewed the JEF's five-year programme of activity and welcomed continued efforts to strengthen coherence with NATO, including work to align JEF response options with NATO regional plans.
Ministers discussed Russia's hybrid activity against JEF nations and other NATO Allies and agreed to continue developing common approaches through JEF mechanisms. Despite Russia's unacceptable acts of sabotage against JEF Nations and other Allies, they are resolved to improving our individual and collective preparedness to defend against these threats and will not be deterred from supporting Ukraine. Ministers reiterate that JEF nations do not seek confrontation and pose no threat to Russia, but Russia should be in no doubt that we will defend ourselves.
Ministers also reviewed progress on defence industrial cooperation following two meetings of JEF National Armaments Directors since the Ankara Summit. They welcomed the pace of work to identify practical opportunities for collaboration and the importance of delivering tangible outcomes. Ministers reaffirmed the need for collaboration in reinforcing interoperability, advancing capability innovation, and strengthening shared industrial resilience. Ministers looked forward to receiving concrete proposals ahead of their next meeting. The Single Services continue to deepen military engagement within the JEF, including through work on the Northern Navies concept, in support of the JEF's five-year exercise plan.
Finally, Ministers reaffirmed the JEF's vital contribution to a stronger Europe within a stronger NATO. They highlighted the JEF's unique role below the threshold of Article V, delivering agile and credible responses to emerging challenges while complementing NATO's deterrence and defence posture. Ministers directed further work to demonstrate the JEF's contribution to Euro-Atlantic security and ensure the Framework continues to meet the evolving needs of our collective security.
Ministers thanked Iceland for hosting the next JEF Leaders' Summit in Reykjavik next spring.