hundreds of bereaved military family members will be able to travel by rail free of charge this Remembrance weekend across Britain
offer will help families attend Remembrance services and commemorative events, including the Cenotaph, without the cost of travel being a barrier
families have until 16 October 2026 to apply for free tickets, helping more bereaved relatives take part in the nation's Remembrance
Hundreds of bereaved military family members will be able to travel by train free of charge this Remembrance weekend (7 to 8 November 2026), helping them attend memorial services and commemorative events to honour loved ones who died while serving in the Armed Forces.
For the first time, one next of kin of a service person who died while serving will be able to travel free of charge on National Rail services to attend Remembrance weekend events.
The move builds on the existing free travel offer for serving personnel and veterans, giving people breathing space and ensuring travel costs are not a barrier for families taking part in remembrance and reflection.
Eligible family members wishing to take up the offer have until 16 October to apply for a free ticket through the Defence Medical Welfare Service.
Rail Minister, Lord Hendy, said:
Remembrance weekend is a time for the nation to come together to honour those who made the ultimate sacrifice whilst serving our country.
Bereaved families are at the heart of these commemorations and the cost of travel should not prevent them from being there to remember their loved ones.
Extending free rail travel to next of kin will help more families attend Remembrance events, standing alongside communities, veterans and serving members of our Armed Forces as we honour and remember those who served.
Minister for Veterans and People, Calvin Bailey, said:
Remembrance is an opportunity for the nation to come together in recognition of the service and sacrifice of our Armed Forces. For bereaved families, this is a deeply personal time.
We must never forget that behind every name we remember is a family whose lives have been changed forever. Providing free rail travel will help bereaved relatives come together and honour their loved one without financial barriers.
Mikki Brett, the widow of the late Chief Petty Officer (CPO) Stuart Brett, who served in the Weapons Engineering branch of the Royal Navy and died in service in April 2023, spoke with Defence Minister Calvin Bailey this week.
Mikki Brett said:
It's fantastic news that the in-service bereaved have been recognised for the support given to their loved ones with free train fares to remembrance events this year.
Mikki is already registered to come to the Cenotaph on Remembrance Sunday and will benefit directly from the new travel offer for those bereaved in service.
Ola Ogun, Co-CEO of Rail Delivery Group, said:
Railways have long been connected to remembrance commemorations, recognising the importance of their contribution during wartime. As an industry, we are proud to continue supporting this important national occasion by offering free travel to serving personnel and veterans.
This year, we are especially pleased to extend that support to one next of kin of those who died while serving in the Armed Forces, recognising not only the sacrifice of those who served, but also the families who continue to carry their legacy and honour their memory.
A spokesperson for SSAFA, the Armed Forces charity, said:
SSAFA welcomes the Department for Transport's decision to extend free travel to bereaved military families during the Remembrance weekend.
This change ensures that those who have lost loved ones in the service of their nation can travel to pay their respects without facing financial strain. It is a deeply meaningful gesture that properly honours the sacrifices of our Forces families, ensuring they can stand together with the nation in remembrance.