Faster front-line delivery with new Testing and Evaluation programme
MOD and QinetiQ launch Project Safari, a joint programme opening up access to UK test and evaluation facilities for SMEs.
- MOD and QinetiQ revolutionising access to Test and Evaluation facilities for SMEs, delivering new tech into service faster
- SAFARI will remove barriers to UK sites, helping new capabilities move from development to deployment quicker
- Supports SDR commitment to support SMEs with additional £2.5 billion every year by 2028
Technologies such as hypersonic missiles, directed energy weapons and autonomous systems will be assessed, refined and delivered quicker than ever before, following a joint Ministry of Defence (MOD) and QinetiQ programme transforming how defence capabilities are tested and evaluated at the pace of modern warfare.
Project Safari will revolutionise access to the UK's sovereign Test and Evaluation (T&E) facilities for Small and Medium Enterprises, creating an agile environment to prove and deliver new technologies into service faster.
For too long, companies - especially those that are SMEs or new to working in defence - have faced barriers that have prevented them getting their ideas and technology tested in real life scenarios, such as outdated bureaucracy to gain multiple levels of approvals.
This programme will remove barriers to UK sites, providing a single front-door for SMEs to access facilities and improving the approval processes for trial activity. That smoother route for innovative firms into the sector will help support jobs and investment in their local economies, powering growth in every postcode.
Minister for Defence Readiness and Industry, Luke Pollard MP, said:
We know that limited access to test and evaluation facilities have been holding back smaller businesses and new entrants from working with defence.
By working hand-in-hand with QinetiQ, we are unlocking British innovation by developing, testing and delivering military capabilities for the UK and our allies at speed.
Group CEO QinetiQ, Steve Wadey, said:
Turning ideas into trusted frontline capability faster than our adversaries is what delivers military advantage and we've got to go faster to stay ahead. Project Safari will transform how the UK approves new technologies, creating a world-leading test and evaluation enterprise that helps government, industry and regulators work together to accelerate the delivery of military capability at the pace demanded by modern warfare.
Project Safari will bring together government, industry, regulators and technology innovators to support the UK's warfighting readiness and streamline how companies access specialist facilities and expertise, modernise the infrastructure so it's fit for a fast-moving digital environment and reduce unnecessary barriers to accelerate decision making.
During a visit to MOD Hebrides, the UK's largest weapons test range, Minister for Defence Readiness and Industry, Luke Pollard MP, signed an agreement with QinetiQ for the first design stage of a multimillion-pound investment to develop the site to enable the testing of hypersonic missiles and other advanced technologies.
The minister was joined by QinetiQ CEO, Steve Wadey to host a roundtable with SME representatives, including Greenjets and Cambridge Aerospace, to listen to the experiences of SMEs accessing T&E services and the barriers they can face.
Luke Pollard MP also met one of the UK companies competing in Project Brakestop, MGI Engineering. An Oxfordshire-based SME, they are developing low-cost long-range weapons for Ukraine.
Project Safari is a practical demonstration of the ambitions set out in the Strategic Defence Review, which committed defence to increasing its spend with SMEs by £2.5 billion a year by summer 2028.
The announcement builds on the work of the Defence Investment Plan, backed by £298 billion of funding in UK defence over the next four years. The plan will drive sustained investment across British industry - including SMEs - ensuring the UK's defence sector remains a cornerstone of the country's economic renewal.