Eight years after the adoption of Resolution 2417, conflict remains a leading driver of acute food insecurity.
As we have heard, last year, for the first time this century, famine was declared simultaneously in two conflicts: Sudan and Gaza.
Extreme food insecurity persists in both.
These famines were man-made.
A reminder that hunger is not inevitable, but often results from choices that deny civilians food, aid, and essential services.
Children pay the highest price.
What is needed is clear: rapid, safe, and unimpeded humanitarian access; an end to attacks on food infrastructure; and, ultimately, an end to the conflicts that drive hunger.
President, the impact of conflict on food security is no longer confined to the battlefield in the traditional sense.
Conflict is also disrupting the global networks that move food, fuel, and fertiliser, with consequences felt far beyond.
Russia's attacks on shipping, civilian vessels, and Black Sea ports have undermined one of the world's most important grain export routes.
Ukraine was once the breadbasket of the world.
Today, Russia's aggression continues to damage infrastructure that feeds millions beyond its borders.
Infrastructure essential to food production, transport, and distribution must be protected.
And we call on Russia to cease these attacks and comply with international humanitarian law.
Iran's attacks and closure of the Strait of Hormuz have also disrupted supply chains and fertiliser markets.
As the Secretary-General warned yesterday, this means deeper hunger, weaker harvests, and greater suffering, especially for the most vulnerable.
We welcome progress under the Secretary-General's Taskforce to address the implications for food security stemming from this crisis.
But we call on Iran to reopen the Strait, uphold freedom of navigation, and respect the primacy of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Both Iran and Russia have reduced grain exports, driving up global food prices.
Vulnerable and import-dependent countries will be hit hardest.
Conflict and disregard for international humanitarian law compound climate stress, debt, and other structural vulnerabilities.
And the strengthening El Niño makes coordinated action to build resilience and protect the most vulnerable even more urgent.
We call for full implementation of Resolution 2417.
It requires the Council to address both local crises and conflicts that threaten global food security.
We already have the tools to identify emerging famine risks, although we must protect and continue to use technology to strengthen them.
Early warnings must lead to early action.
Warnings must be acted on and violations must lead to accountability.
The UK remains committed to working with partners to strengthen early warning and accelerate emergency support, including pre-arranged disaster risk finance.
President, resolution 2417 provides the framework.
The Council has the tools.
We must turn early warning into early action, uphold international humanitarian law, and ensure accountability before hunger becomes famine.