-
UK Minister for the Indo-Pacific Rosie Winterton makes first overseas visit to Cambodia, visiting Siem Reap and Oddar Meanchey.
-
The Minister will visit a UK-funded education programme for those displaced by the Thailand-Cambodia border conflict, continuing more than three decades of UK support for humanitarian mine clearance.
-
The Minister will also visit Phnom Penh for meetings with the Cambodian government on trade and investment, development and human rights.
UK development and humanitarian programmes are helping to support security, stability and long-term recovery in Cambodia, underscoring the UK's commitment to sustainable peace and prosperity as Minister for the Indo-Pacific Rosie Winterton visits the country.
During the visit, the Minister will travel to Oddar Meanchey in northern Cambodia where the UK is working in partnership with Cambodian organisations to support local communities, in line with the UK's modern approach to development. Visiting Kok Prasat, the Minister will see how UK support is helping children displaced by the recent conflict between Thailand and Cambodia continue their education and rebuild their lives. The visit will underline the UK's unwavering support for sustainable peace and full implementation of the December 2025 ceasefire.
The Minister will also meet demining experts from UK charity HALO Trust and Apopo. The UK has supported demining and humanitarian recovery in Cambodia for more than three decades, clearing the equivalent of 22,400 football pitches since 2014 and returning land to productive use. In May, the UK announced a further £1.6 million for mine clearance and risk education in Cambodia, helping to clear nearly 1.94 million square metres of contaminated land and support Cambodia's goal of becoming mine-impact free by 2030.
Minister for the Indo-Pacific Rosie Winterton said:
Cambodia sits at the heart of a region that matters for the UK's security and prosperity.
On my first overseas visit as Minister for the Indo-Pacific, I am seeing how UK support is helping communities recover from conflict and clearing landmines that threaten lives and livelihoods.
The UK is committed to Cambodia's stability and long-term development, and to working together for a peaceful and prosperous region.
In Phnom Penh, the Minister is expected to meet Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Manet, where they will discuss the strong partnership between the UK and Cambodia and shared priorities for the future.
The Minister will pave the way for further cooperation on education, signing a Memorandum of Understanding that will strengthen institutional partnerships, encourage knowledge exchange and support the development of the skills needed for Cambodia's future growth. British schools and universities have increased their presence in Cambodia in recent years, with De Montfort University and Teesside University providing UK degrees in Cambodia so young Cambodians can access world-class international education.