Horse owners across England are being invited to take part in a new study that will help researchers identify the best ways to monitor antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in healthy horses.
The HealthyHorseAMR Project
The HealthyHorseAMR project, led by the University of Liverpool and funded by the Veterinary Medicines Directorate (VMD), aims to identify the most effective methods for surveillance of antimicrobial resistance in horses. It is the latest in a series of VMD-funded studies working to close known gaps in the UK's AMR surveillance, following the launch of a world-first study into AMR in healthy cats and dogs, led by Scotland's Royal College (SRUC), in 2025.
AMR is recognised as one of the world's most significant public health threats. It occurs when bacteria develop resistance to antibiotics which can make infections difficult, or even impossible, to treat. Antibiotic resistant bacteria can also be found in healthy animals without causing disease, meaning animals can act as reservoirs of resistance that may spread to other animals or people.
Understanding AMR in horses
The UK has a 20-year vision to contain, control and mitigate AMR by 2040. This is being delivered through the UK's National Action Plan for Antimicrobial Resistance 2024-2029. Strengthening AMR surveillance across human and animal health is one of the plan's central commitments.
The UK has well-established surveillance programmes for AMR in some livestock sectors, with harmonised monitoring of healthy pigs and poultry now in its 12th year and reported annually in the UK Veterinary Antibiotic Resistant Sales and Surveillance (UK-VARSS) report. However, there are gaps in our surveillance of companion animals and horses. Monitoring AMR in healthy horses presents different challenges, and effective surveillance will require tailoring methods specifically to the equine sector.
Latest estimates show that there are approximately 847,000 horses in the UK. This includes horses owned by around 374,000 households as well as those kept in professional settings such as racing yards. The close relationship between horses and the people who own, ride, and care for them creates opportunities for the transmission of antibiotic-resistant bacteria in either direction.
This new VMD-funded research seeks to address this gap by exploring different ways of collecting samples and identifying the approaches that could support future representative surveillance in healthy horses. This work will provide valuable evidence on AMR within the UK equine sector, helping researchers better understand how resistant bacteria circulate, and enabling the early identification of emerging resistance.
Horse owners encouraged to take part
Researchers at the University of Liverpool have been conducting a veterinarian-focused study of AMR in healthy horses during phase one of this project. The second phase will expand into citizen science, allowing horse owners to contribute directly to the research.
Horse owners and keepers living in England are being invited to participate by completing a questionnaire and providing a faecal sample from their horse. After registering, participants will receive a sampling pack through the post, complete with pre-paid return packaging and instructions for sample collection.
Researchers will use the samples to evaluate surveillance approaches and determine the most effective methods for monitoring antimicrobial resistance in healthy horses in the future. People responsible for horses, such as trainers, are also encouraged to participate.
Supporting the UK's AMR ambitions
This research is an important step towards developing representative surveillance of AMR in healthy horses and will contribute to wider efforts to improve understanding of AMR in animals to improve animal and public health.
Professor Gina Pinchbeck, Veterinary Epidemiology, University of Liverpool
We are very excited to be working on this project at the University of Liverpool, building on previous expertise in equine AMR surveillance including ongoing work within the Equine Veterinary Surveillance Network (EVSNET). The HealthyHorseAMR project will provide much-needed up to date evidence and inform the best methods for horse recruitment and sampling for future surveillance efforts. This is an important step towards a One Health AMR surveillance system in the UK, and we encourage everyone within the equine industry to get involved.
Dr. Tamsin Dewé, Head of AMR Surveillance and Evidence, VMD
This is an exciting time for AMR surveillance in the UK. The VMD has commissioned and funded this new research to help fill an important evidence gap. This study led by the University of Liverpool will help improve our understanding of antibiotic-resistant bacteria in healthy horses and help us identify where further action is needed. The VMD is proud to support innovative research to protect animal and human health as we work towards comprehensive AMR surveillance across UK animal populations
How to get involved
If you own or keep horses and would like to take part in the HealthyHorseAMR citizen science study visit this website to register your details.