The Independent Chief Inspector's report on 'An inspection of the Home Office's engagement with local authorities in the planning and development of asylum accommodation' has been sent to the Home Secretary today for publication.
The Independent Chief Inspector has also commenced an inspection of the Work Services Command.
The Independent Chief Inspector's report on 'An inspection of the Future Border and Immigration System benefits realisation' has been sent to the Home Secretary today for publication.
The Independent Chief Inspector's report on 'An inspection of the UK-France Agreement on the Prevention of Dangerous Journeys' has been sent to the Home Secretary today for publication.
The following inspection reports have been published today:
1. An inspection of Home Office management of contact with migrants who are without leave to enter or remain (September 2024 - February 2025).
2. An inspection of administrative reviews (April - August 2025).
3. An inspection of overstayers (March - October 2025).
4. An inspection of asylum casework (June - December 2025).
5. An inspection of refusals and cancellations of permission to enter the UK (September 2025 - February 2026).
The Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration has commenced an inspection of the Home Office's pre-appeal review process.
The inspection report on Home Office country of origin information on Afghanistan and Colombia has been published.
The Independent Chief Inspector's report on 'An inspection of refusals and cancellations of permission to enter the UK' has been sent to the Home Secretary today for publication.
The Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration has commenced an inspection of the Home Office's engagement with local authorities in the planning and development of asylum accommodation.
The Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration has commenced an inspection of the benefits arising from, and enabled by, the Future Border and Immigration System (FBIS) programme.
The Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration has commenced an inspection of the UK-France Agreement on the Prevention of Dangerous Journeys . Please check our website for details of the call for evidence.
The Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration has commenced an inspection of the UK-France Agreement on the Prevention of Dangerous Journeys . Please check our website for details of the call for evidence.
The inspection report on Home Office country of origin information on Afghanistan and Colombia has been sent to the Home Secretary.