Ian brings more than 40 years of finance leadership experience spanning professional services, global pharmaceuticals and luxury retail to the NAD Group.
As CFO, Ian will join the NAD Group Executive Committee and play a crucial role in how the NAD Group delivers the Defence Investment Plan (DIP), reacting to Defence's new capability priorities. Under his leadership, the Group's finance professionals will support the NAD Group teams responsible for developing, delivering, sustaining, housing and harbouring the UK's 'national arsenal' and defence estate.
Ian has a history of crafting smart financial strategies and improving performance in both FTSE 100 and private international companies, and has helped solve financial business challenges for FTSE 100 firms.
Commenting on his appointment, Ian Brimicombe said:
I'm delighted to be joining the National Armaments Director Group as Chief Financial Officer. Having spent my career in the private sector, I'm excited by the opportunity to bring that experience to the Ministry of Defence at such an important time for the organisation, for defence and for the UK. I look forward to working with the team to build on its foundations and support its future growth and success.
On graduating from King's College London, Ian completed his accountancy and tax qualifications at Coopers and Lybrand (now PWC). After building a strong technical foundation across audit, tax and corporate finance, he moved into the pharmaceutical industry, joining what later became AstraZeneca, where he spent over 20 years in increasingly senior leadership roles.
Ian subsequently joined the British fashion house, Burberry, where he spent nearly seven years supporting finance and business transformation, including navigating the organisation through the COVID-19 pandemic and leading refinancing activities. Most recently he was CFO at Abercrombie & Kent Group.
Rupert Pearce, National Armaments Director, said:
I am delighted to welcome Ian to the NAD Group. He brings with him a wealth of experience from the high-tech world of pharmaceuticals and the fast-paced retail arena. As UK Defence continues its transformation, and we look to drive greater efficiency into our systems, these are skills we really value.
David Johnson, who retires this Autumn, leaves an exceptional legacy as our first Group Finance Director. He has been a stalwart member of the MOD for 37 years. His professionalism, rigour and sharp eye for detail have helped make our armed forces and country more secure. We wish him all the best for his retirement.
Ian will join the NAD Group on 7 September 2026, succeeding David who retires at the end of November.