Graves of five soldiers killed in Normandy identified
Five missing soldiers of World War 2 who were killed during the Battle of Normandy now have named graves after Rededication ceremonies were held on 29 and 30 September 26, and 1 October 26.
The graves of five soldiers who went missing during the Battle of Normandy have been identified and were rededicated this week. A commemorative service honouring all five men, was also held at the British Normandy Memorial in Ver-sur-Mer (30 September 26).
Rededication services took place at CWGC St Charles-de-Percy War Cemetery for Private (Pte) George Chapman of 1st Battalion The Herefordshire Regiment (29 September 26), at CWGC Bayeux War Cemetery for Private Vincent Coia of 7th Battalion The Seaforth Highlanders and Lance Corporal (LCpl) Reginald Cyril Dewey of 4th Battalion The Lincolnshire Regiment (30 September 26), at CWGC Hottot-les-Bagues War Cemetery for Serjeant (Sjt) Frederick Albert Harrison of 1st Battalion The Dorsetshire Regiment and at CWGC Ranville War Cemetery for Corporal (Cpl) Henry Thomas Read of 8th Battalion The Rifle Brigade (1 October 26).
Members of the Chapman, Dewey and Read families were present at their relatives' rededication service. The Coia and Harrison families were not able to attend, but a poignant message from Reg Harrison, the 95 year old younger brother of Sjt Harrison, was read out at his graveside in Hottot-les-Bagues War Cemetery.
The message read:
Although I didn't know my brother very well, as I was only young when he left home to join the army, I'm very proud of him and what he achieved, and what he went onto do for his King and country. It was soldiers like Fred that helped us win the war, and keep us safe. Always in my thoughts. Your young brother, Reg.
The services were organised by the Ministry of Defence's Joint Casualty and Compassionate Centre (JCCC), known as the 'War Detectives', and were supported by serving soldiers from 5th Battalion The Rifles, 2nd Battalion The Royal Anglian Regiment and 2nd Battalion The Royal Regiment of Scotland.
Rosie Barron, JCCC Caseworker, said:
It has been an honour to have organised these rededication services and to have played a part in giving these families answers as to what happened to their relatives. The local community in Normandy has been very welcoming of both the families and the military party. For them the Battle of Normandy is not just commemorated but celebrated as the moment that they regained their liberty after four long years of occupation. The sacrifices made by these men were not in vain. There are many graves in Normandy which may yet be identifiable with further investigation, so this work will continue into the future.
Reverend Paul Collins CF, Chaplain to 5th Battalion The Rifles, conducted the services.
Reverend Paul Collins said:
It is my privilege to be able part of these rededication services. These brave soldiers gave their lives in the events following D-Day which led to the liberation of France and the defeat of the Nazis. It is fitting that due to the hard work of the JCCC Commemorations Team and others, we now know who these soldiers were and where they are buried. The graves now bear their names for all those who visit in the future to see and remember.
All five men had previously been commemorated on the Bayeux Memorial to the missing. The CWGC has now replaced their headstones with named markers and will care for them in perpetuity.
Dr James Wallis, Head of Commemorations at the CWGC, said:
The Commission's staff consider it a privilege to care for the now-identified graves of these five soldiers who were killed in the aftermath of D-Day during the Battle of Normandy. The impact of loss upon the respective families of these casualties still resonates strongly - so we are thankful to those who instigated each identification and furthermore to the work of partner organisations which has led to this outcome and brought us together today.