- A significant increase of British Sign Language (BSL) translations means more people can access government communications
- A new report shows BSL usage is up by 41% across government departments in the last year, and up by 161% compared with 2023
- More accessible communications from the government opens up opportunity for BSL users.
British Sign Language (BSL) users around the country have been able to access more government information than ever before, as departments continue to increase the quantity of communications translated into BSL.
The government's fourth BSL Report, published today, highlights that BSL translations of government communications in the reporting year May 2025 to April 2026 went up by 41% compared with the previous reporting year. Since reporting began in 2023, the government has substantially increased its use of BSL in communications by 161%.
The report illustrates continued efforts across government departments to break down barriers to opportunity for BSL users.
Rt Hon Sir Stephen Timms MP, Minister of State for Social Security and Disability, said:
It is great to see that more government publications than ever before have been translated into BSL, opening up access for the Deaf community.
By providing Deaf BSL users with direct access to the government's plans and consultations, we're ensuring that everyone has the opportunity to engage with the government on issues that will affect them.
This year's report found that some government departments have more than tripled the number of publications translated into BSL since 2025. These publications include government plans, strategies, consultation documents, and consultation responses.
The report also shows that there was an increase in BSL-translated versions of practical government guidance. Examples include the Home Office's guidance on passport photos, and the Ministry of Housing, Communities, and Local Government's explanation on changes to the private rented sector.
By significantly expanding the use of BSL, government departments are making it easier for BSL users to access important information.
Dr Joanna Atkinson, Co-Chair of the BSL Advisory Board, said:
Every person deserves the chance to have a say on future policies. By increasing the use of BSL across government communications, it is clear that it is becoming easier for the BSL community to engage on the decisions that matter to us.
We're really pleased to see the progress that has been made this year and look forward to another year ahead of improving engagement with the BSL community.
The British Sign Language Act 2022 requires the government to report every three years to show how ministerial departments are using BSL in communications with the public on policy and changes to the law. This government is going faster and further to ensure progress by publishing a report every year up to 2027.
Additionally, the government recently announced grant funding for the assessment of registered interpreters for Deafblind people. This grant funding is expected to deliver a more than eightfold increase in the number of interpreters across the country.
Work is also underway to develop a UK government Plan for Disability. This plan will outline current efforts to support disabled people and set out a vision that will show what this government is aiming to achieve for disabled people in the longer term.
In addition, the government is taking action to help thousands of disabled people move into or stay in work, by employing 500 additional staff to tackle backlogs in the Access to Work scheme - a 72% increase.
BSL version of this press release
BSL video: Government increases its use of BSL to make communications more accessible
Notes to editors
The BSL Advisory Board is a non-statutory board of 19 people - mostly BSL users - including 2 co-chairs. The Board was established in December 2022 to advise the government on issues that are important to Deaf people, and on how to put the BSL Act into practice. Some of the board's key achievements include shaping the subject content for the BSL GCSE qualification, working with government bodies to improve Access to Work, and publishing the landmark Locked Out health report.
The fourth BSL report, covering data from the period between the first report and this report (1 May 2025 to 30 April 2026), has now been published. A copy will be placed in the libraries of both the House of Commons and House of Lords.
The third BSL report showed an increase in the use of BSL by government departments in public-facing communications since the first report in 2023.
The second report, delayed due to the UK General Election, was published in December 2024. This report showed that BSL usage had more than doubled compared to the first report.
The first report, published in July 2023 under the previous administration, set out a baseline of activity delivered by government departments, highlighting the areas of government communication that required further improvement.