The Regulator of Social Housing (RSH) has published a regulatory judgement today (Monday 27 July 2026) because it is considering using its power to remove Easy Housing Association (Easy) from the register of social housing providers.
RSH has taken further action due to Easy's persistent and long-standing failure to deliver the outcomes of the Governance and Financial Viability Standard and the Rent Standard.
Easy is a small provider of social housing, operating in Birmingham and London. It provides housing through lease agreements with private landlords.
This follows intensive engagement with Easy since RSH published findings in 2023, and a range of enforcement actions since July 2025, which were aimed at improving Easy's capacity and capability to address its failures. Easy has failed to fully comply with the terms of the enforcement notice and requirement to appoint a manager to manage its social housing affairs.
RSH also made three appointments to Easy's board in July 2025. Easy has not adequately cooperated with the appointed individuals who have sought to strengthen governance and provide valuable senior-level sector expertise in finance, governance and tenant safety. RSH has extended the appointments for a further three months while it considers de-registration to ensure tenants' interests are protected as far as possible.
In relation to the Governance and Financial Viability Standard, Easy has failed to demonstrate that it has effective governance and probity arrangements. It has also failed to show that it has an appropriate, robust and prudent business planning framework, or that it is managing its affairs with the appropriate level of skill, independence and foresight. And it has not demonstrated that it is managing its resources effectively to maintain viability and ensure social homes are not put at undue risk.
RSH has concluded that Easy has failed to ensure it rents are set appropriately to meet the Rent Standard, or that rents meet the definition of social housing.
Easy can make representations which RSH will carefully consider before making a final decision.
Jonathan Walters, Chief Executive at the Regulator of Social Housing, said:
"Being a registered social landlord comes with responsibilities. We expect landlords to take prompt and effective action when we identify failings - but Easy has failed to address its issues or work constructively with us, despite us using our enforcement powers.
"We are concerned that Easy does not have a credible route to resolving these serious issues and, as a result, we are now considering compulsory de-registration."
Notes to editors
-
RSH has a statutory duty to maintain the register of social housing providers. Under section 118(1) (aa) of the HRA 2008, RSH may remove a private registered provider from the register if we think it has failed to meet a standard under section 193, 194 or 194C. Before acting under section 118(1)(aa) the RSH must give a notice warning the provider that the regulator is considering action and specify a period (which must be at least 14 days) within which the provider may make representations. RSH has accordingly given notice to Easy.
- As Easy owns fewer than 1,000 social homes, it is classed as a small landlord. RSH does not issue grades to small landlords and only publishes or update regulatory judgements where it considers there to be serious weaknesses or failings in a landlord's delivery of the outcomes of the standards.
- A registered provider is responsible for ensuring that it manages itself effectively, achieves the standards set by RSH, and engages positively with the RSH's regulatory framework. Where a failure against a standard or other problem has been identified, RSH expects providers to respond in a prompt and effective manner. It may be necessary for RSH to step in and exercise its powers under the Housing and Regeneration Act 2008 as amended when a provider fails to do so. RSH has published guidance on how it uses and intends to use its statutory regulatory and enforcement powers.
-
RSH published an enforcement notice to Easy in July 2025, following a regulatory notice in March 2023 requiring specified actions to address serious regulatory concerns and failures to meet the regulatory standards. Sections 219 to 225 of the Act which allow the regulator to require a registered provider to take specified action to resolve a specified failure or other problem.
-
RSH issued a Requirement to Easy in July 2025 to appoint a manger to manage its social housing affairs and ensure a credible and comprehensive action plan is developed and that capacity is in place for its delivery. Sections 251 to 252 of the Act allow the regulator to require a registered provider to appoint a manager to manage the entirety of their affairs relating to social housing or specific aspects of social housing.
-
In July 2025, RSH appointed three people to Easy's board:
- Nicole Seymour - Executive Director - Corporate Services (Sanctuary Group)
- Sayeed Haris - Executive Director of Property Services (Midland Heart)
- Waseem Butt - Director of Building Safety (Midland Heart)
These appointments were renewed in January 2026 and July 2026. Nicole Seymour has now stepped down for personal reasons, and she will be replaced by Susanne Dodd (Director - Governance and Legal Services & Data Protection Officer [Solicitor] at Sanctuary Group). Susanne Dodd, Sayeed Harris and Waseem Butt will remain as statutory appointees of Easy's board for the next three months. Section 269 of the Act enables the regulator to appoint one or more persons as an officer of a private registered provider.
- For media enquiries contact Vicky Moore vicky.moore@rsh.gov.uk or Christian Cosby christian.cosby@rsh.gov.uk For general enquiries contact enquiries@rsh.gov.uk.