The August jobs report set to be released Friday is expected to put the final touches on what has been a relatively jobless summer.
If expectations hold, the Bureau of Labor Statistics count will show growth of just 53,000 in nonfarm payrolls, according to the Dow Jones consensus estimate. Even with the anemic growth rate, that is expected to be enough to keep the unemployment rate at 4.1%.
More broadly, though, the report would follow counts for June and July that together showed a net loss of 3,000 jobs. Also, the initial August numbers have been revised lower for the past four years in a row.
Together, the data suggest a labor market in neither boom nor bust mode - one that is increasingly becoming an afterthought for Federal Reserve officials looking to plot their next monetary policy action.
The current state of the jobs picture is "stable but unexciting," said Dan North, senior economist for Allianz Trade North America.
"I don't see a whole lot of really robust growth, which is understandable because if you're an employer, you're sitting here and you've got a war going on, energy prices going up and down, tariffs, and the administration changing everything overnight from day to day," he added. "So you've got a lot of uncertainties out there."
Indeed, geopolitical uncertainty and the impact of artificial intelligence are two dominant labor market themes, along with a shrinking labor force that has helped keep the unemployment rate in check.
Despite the various pressures, companies have avoided widespread layoffs. Weekly jobless claims have been in check, and the total layoff pace in 2026 is the slowest in four years, according to outplacement consultants Challenger, Gray & Christmas.
Fed officials in recent days have said they consider the labor market far less of a concern than inflation. Governor Michael Barr earlier this week characterized the situation as "stable" and Governor Christopher Waller said Thursday the jobs picture is in "satisfactory shape" - hardly ringing endorsements, but enough to allow the Fed to consider raising rates without disturbing the labor market if inflation doesn't ease further.
"Monthly payrolls readings have been softer in recent months, but low jobless claims and a steady unemployment rate have kept Fed officials unconcerned about the labor market," Citigroup economist Andrew Hollenhorst said in a note.
Citi sees the August count at just 20,000 new jobs, following a loss of 23,000 in July, and a potential tick up in the unemployment rate to 4.2%. But Hollenhorst expects the Fed will see those numbers as "stable" and not cause for broader concern.
Still, Citi thinks the Fed's next move will be a cut. Comments from Waller on inflation pushed traders to price in the likelihood the Fed would hold at its meeting in less than two weeks.
August's report will be influenced by several factors outside the usual seasonal issues.
The government in July canceled its Temporary Protected Status for thousands of Haitians, possibly lowering the employment rolls. The move has been projected to impact 350,000 Haitians.
At the same time, Vanguard said its proprietary data on 401(k) accounts indicates a gain of just 8,000 jobs for the month, owing in some part to a "noticeable decline" in hiring in the 21-to-24 age bracket.