UK police arrest 22-year-old British man in suspected Fairford base plot
UK police on Tuesday said they had arrested a 22-year old British man in London on suspicion of preparing terrorist acts in relation to the suspected plot at the RAF Fairford airbase used by the US to strike Iran.
British police on Tuesday said a 22-year-old man had been arrested in London on suspicion of preparing terrorist acts as part of their investigation into a suspected plot near RAF Fairford, the airbase used by the US to strike Iran.
Counter Terrorism Policing said the man was arrested in Westminster and officers had searched a property in the same area. He remains in custody.
The arrest is the latest in an investigation that has drawn international attention after US President Donald Trump said a threat linked to Iran had subsequently prompted the removal of American B-1 bombers from the base. Iran has denied any involvement in any alleged plot.
"This remains a live investigation and our specialist teams continue to pursue multiple lines of enquiry into the circumstances surrounding events near RAF Fairford," Senior National Coordinator for Counter Terrorism Policing Vicki Evans said on Tuesday.
Six men in their 20s, arrested previously in connection with the investigation, including a dual British-Iranian national arrested on October 1, remain on police bail.
It remains unclear why they were released on bail a day after their arrests. Laurence Taylor, the head of UK Counter Terrorism Policing, said they face stringent bail conditions and "absolutely remain under investigation".
The decision drew criticism from Trump, who said he was surprised and "wouldn't have" allowed the suspects to be freed.
Scores of residents were evacuated from their homes near the base early on September 27 as armed police officers and army bomb-disposal experts swooped on the rural area. Police later said they had found a quantity of an accelerant - gasoline - in three vans linked to the five suspects, but no explosives.
British Prime Minister Andy Burnham has said the UK sees "strong indications" that Iran played a part in the incident
(FRANCE 24 with AP and Reuters)