US to hit Iran 'hard' after attack on bases in Jordan, Trump says
US President Donald Trump on Wednesday said the US military will be hitting Iran "hard" after a missile attack against US bases in Jordan, according to Fox News. Earlier, Iranian state television said the US struck a city in the country's northwest in the Piranshahr border area with Iraq. Read our live blog to see how all the day's events unfolded.
This live blog is no longer being updated.
Saudi Arabia seeks international coalition to protect Red Sea shipping from Houthis, two sources say
Saudi Arabia is seeking to build an international coalition to protect shipping in the Red Sea from Houthi attacks, two people familiar with the deliberations said on Wednesday.
The composition of the coalition has yet to be finalised and remains under discussion with dozens of countries, the sources said.
Trump says will hit Iran hard after attack, was briefed on Egypt tankers
US President Donald Trump said on Wednesday the United States would hit Iran very hard after an attack on the US military in Jordan.
"So it's our turn," Trump told reporters at the White House. He said Washington would see if there was an agreement at some point, "but we're going to hit them very hard."
Trump also said he was briefed on a drone attack on tankers off Egypt.
US forces say 20 vessels diverted from Iranian ports amid blockade
US forces said on Wednesday that 20 commercial vessels had been diverted from Iranian ports amid an ongoing blockade, adding that they had disabled two vessels and boarded two others.
IMF says Saudi economy resilient in face of Mideast war
The International Monetary Fund on Wednesday said the economy of Saudi Arabia, the world's largest oil exporter, has been resilient in the Middle East war, but cautioned against the impact of future uncertainty.
Despite the war that erupted in February with US and Israeli strikes on Iran, and the retaliatory attacks on Saudi and its neighbours, the IMF said the Gulf kingdom's economy showed "agility and resilience".
In the concluding statement of its "Article IV" consultation the institution's economists hailed "Saudi Arabia's strong macroeconomic fundamentals and diversified oil and logistics infrastructure".
Public executions in Iran spark anti-regime protests
The Islamic Republic publicly executed two Iranian protesters in Isfahan at dawn on July 28. Several hundred people gathered near a stage set up in the city's Alikhani Square, but instead of cheering the execution, they chanted slogans against the police, prompting anti-riot units to disperse the crowd.
Drone strikes ignite fires on natural gas vessels at an Egyptian port
Drone strikes ignited fires Wednesday on two natural gas vessels at an Egyptian port, a maritime security firm said, as the US-Iran war flared on multiple fronts in the Middle East.
The attacks were on a US-owned floating storage facility and a Greek-owned tanker, according to Ambrey, a British maritime security firm.
No injuries were reported from the fires, according to the Egyptian Petroleum Ministry, which gave no information on the cause.
It was not immediately clear who was responsible for the strikes.
New US sanctions target Iran's Hormuz income
The US on Wednesday imposed new sanctions on entities it accused of being linked to Iran's Revolutionary Guards and of extorting commercial ships transiting the Strait of Hormuz. Washington said the entities forced vessels to buy mandatory maritime insurance against risks, including vessel seizures, allegedly created by the Iranian regime itself.
The US also sanctioned eight companies accused of helping transport Iranian crude oil and petrochemicals to China and the United Arab Emirates as part of Iran's so-called "shadow fleet" used to evade sanctions.
The measures came after Iran resumed blocking the Strait of Hormuz, a vital global energy route, following renewed hostilities with Washington. Before the war, around 20% of the world's oil and liquefied natural gas passed through the strait.
Satirical 'Iran War Participation Trophy' mocking Trump on display in New York
People take pictures of the "Iran War Participation Trophy" at Foley Square on July 29, 2026 in New York City. A 10 toot tall satirical trophy monument adorned with fake participation trophies, ribbons and certificates mocking US President Donald Trump was installed by an anonymous art collective called the Secret Handshake. The monument was previously installed in the National Mall. @Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images/AFP
Trump seeks to take action in the Middle East ahead of midterm elections
The US and Saudi Arabia jointly struck Iran-backed militias on Wednesday, widening the conflict in the Middle East. The strikes came a day after US President Donald Trump met Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu for the first time since the two countries launched their military campaign against Iran.
With the US midterm elections drawing closer, Trump is under pressure to take decisive action in the conflict. FRANCE 24's Angela Diffley tells us more.
US, Saudi Araba launch joint strikes on Iraq
The US-Israel war on Iran is widening, with the US and Saudi Arabia launching joint airstrikes against Iran-backed armed groups in Iraq.
Earlier, Tehran targeted US bases in Jordan and ships in the Strait of Hormuz. President Donald Trump has now vowed further retaliation, raising fresh concerns that the conflict could be entering a dangerous new phase.
Pro-Iran Iraqi groups say response to US-Saudi strikes 'inevitable'
A powerful alliance of pro-Iran armed groups warned on Wednesday that a response to the deadly US-Saudi strikes in Iraq was "inevitable".
The Islamic Resistance in Iraq, which has targeted US facilities hundreds of times during the Middle East war, said "our response to the American enemy is inevitable, and may target its tools in Saudi Arabia".
Iraq militants say 5 Iranians among those killed in US-Saudi strikes
US-Saudi strikes on the Hashed al-Shaabi, an armed Iraqi alliance that includes pro-Iran groups, killed five Iranian advisers, two sources from the alliance told AFP on Wednesday.
AFP correspondents saw coffins wrapped in Iranian flags during a funeral organised by the Hashed al-Shaabi in Baghdad for those killed. The sources said the Iranians died in a strike in the central Diyala province.
US issues new Iran-related sanctions targeting tankers
The Trump administration issued another round of Iran-related sanctions, targeting eight tankers and 10 entities, according to a notice posted on the US Department of Treasury's website.
Iraq vows to defend sovereignty, prevent threats to neighbours
Iraq vowed on Wednesday to defend its sovereignty and to prevent its territory from being used against neighbouring countries following deadly US-Saudi strikes on the country.
Iraq's Ministerial Council for National Security said it "decided to adopt a comprehensive security plan to strengthen control across the country, confront any violation of Iraq's sovereignty, and prevent any source from using Iraqi territory to threaten neighboring states".
Who are the Iraqi armed militants hit by US-Saudi strikes?
The US and Saudi Arabia on Wednesday struck positions belonging to the Hashed al-Shaabi, an armed Iraqi alliance including powerful pro-Iran groups that have long threatened Washington.
The Hashed al-Shaabi, also known as the Popular Mobilisation Forces (PMF), is a network of Shia-majority factions that was established in 2014 to fight the Islamic State group. It was formed following a fatwa from Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the highest Shia Islam religious authority in Iraq, at a time when IS was conquering swathes of the country.
Pro-Iran armed groups heeded the call and were also joined in the fight by Iraqi volunteers from across the country. The Hashed forces were mostly trained by Iranians and led by Tehran-backed armed groups, which fought American forces after the US-led invasion that toppled former ruler Saddam Hussein in 2003.
Their efforts were overseen by General Qasem Soleimani, the former head of the Quds Force, the foreign operations arm of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps. Soleimani was killed in an American strike in Baghdad in 2020.
Trump says US to hit Iran 'hard' after attack on bases in Jordan, Fox News reports
President Donald Trump on Wednesday said the US military will be hitting Iran "hard" after a missile attack against US bases in Jordan, Fox News reported.
"We'll be hitting them hard. They're going to get a beating," Fox's correspondent quoted Trump as saying, adding that the US president used swear words to emphasize his point: "We are going to beat the 'effing s' out of them."
US-Saudi strikes in Iraq kill 20, Iraq militant alliance says
US-Saudi strikes on Iraq on Wednesday killed at least 20 members of the Hashed al-Shaabi, an armed Iraqi alliance that includes pro-Iran groups, the alliance said.
The United States and Saudi Arabia said they had struck Iran-backed militants in Iraq in response to attacks on US forces and Saudi oil facilities.
Washington and Tehran are Iraq's main allies, but their enmity has long turned the country into a proxy battleground and left successive governments struggling to maintain a delicate balance between the foes.
The Hashed al-Shaabi, also known as the Popular Mobilisation Forces (PMF), said that at least 20 fighters "were martyred and another 32 wounded according to a preliminary toll".
The Hashed alliance was created in 2014 to fight jihadists before it was formally integrated into the armed forces. It includes brigades belonging to Iran-backed groups reputed for acting unilaterally.
UK looks to build naval coalition to secure shipping in Strait of Hormuz
US and Saudi forces said they struck an Iraqi militant alliance on July 29, as the Middle East war expands beyond its main focus in Iran to involve the Islamic republic's proxies.
The strikes follow a short lull in direct US attacks on targets in Iran, with Tehran's allies in Yemen and beyond becoming increasingly drawn in.
This comes as the UK is looking to build a naval coalition to secure the Strait of Hormuz. FRANCE 24's Angela Diffley tells us more.
Trump says US-Saudi attacks in Iraq coordinated with Iraqi govt, Fox News reports
President Donald Trump on Wednesday said that US-Saudi bombing of pro-Iranian militias overnight inside Iraq had been coordinated with the authorities in Baghdad, Fox News reported.
Trump "says those strikes were coordinated with the Iraqi government", a Fox correspondent said after speaking with the US leader.
Trump's reported assertion came as Iraq's presidency denounced the US-Saudi attacks as a "blatant violation of Iraq's sovereignty".
Iraq presidency denounces deadly US-Saudi strikes as a 'blatant violation'
The Iraqi presidency on Wednesday condemned the US-Saudi strikes that targeted the Popular Mobilisation Forces, or Hashed al-Shaabi, an armed Iraqi alliance that includes powerful pro-Iran factions.
The presidency, which did not name the United States and Saudi Arabia, said it "denounces the bombing that targeted the Hashed al-Shaabi bases and considers it an unacceptable attack and a blatant violation of Iraq's sovereignty, targeting its official institutions". It also said it rejects the use of Iraqi territory to launch attacks on neighbouring countries.
(FRANCE 24 with AFP, AP and Reuters)