Football legend Zinedine Zidane named head coach of French national team Les Bleus
It was the worst-kept secret in French football: legendary midfielder Zinedine Zidane will replace Didier Deschamps as the new coach of French national team Les Bleus. Zidane, who has not coached since leaving Real Madrid in 2021, had long been viewed as the leading candidate for the role.
Zinedine Zidane was appointed France coach on Tuesday, as widely expected, following the departure of Didier Deschamps, the French Football Federation (FFF) announced.
Zidane, 54, had long been viewed as the leading candidate for the role and had been waiting for an opportunity to take charge of the national team for several years.
He will replace Deschamps, whose tenure began in 2012 and ended earlier this month after France finished fourth at the 2026 World Cup.
Read moreGolden era ends for Deschamps' France as Midas touch deserts Les Bleus
Deschamps guided France to 2018 World Cup glory and the final four years later.
"For me, it's an immense joy... about being able to become the coach of this French team. I don't have any other words," said Zidane.
"I'm holding myself back because I have so many emotions inside me. I'm ready for the challenge, that's what drives me today."
Former Real Madrid star Zidane, who was Deschamps' teammate in the 1998 World Cup triumph, has been readying himself for the role since leaving Real Madrid in 2021.
"The France job was the only one I wanted," Zidane said after the announcement at the FFF headquarters in Paris.
"I've had offers over these four or five years to take charge of a club and I turned them all down for the French national team."
The former France playmaker, who scored twice in the 1998 World Cup final victory over Brazil and also won the 2000 European Championship as a player, has coached only one club, Real Madrid.
During his time with the Spanish giants, he led them to three consecutive Champions League titles in 2016, 2017 and 2018, an unprecedented achievement in the competition's modern era.
"I think it's a completely different job, that's for sure," said Zidane. "I've experienced the club side of it. Now this is something new for me, but it doesn't scare me."
Zidane will follow in the footsteps of former international teammates Laurent Blanc, who coached the national side from 2010 to 2012, and Deschamps.
"I'm going to give everything so that this team keeps on winning. That's it, the only thing that drives me is being able to work for this France team and making sure it keeps on winning."
He will take over on a four-year deal that runs until the 2030 World Cup co-hosted by Spain, Portugal and Morocco.
Zidane's first game at the helm of France will come away to Turkey in the UEFA Nations League on September 25. His first match at home will be against Italy at the Stade de France on October 2.
(FRANCE 24 with AFP)