'Jubilation and pain': German far right marches to victory in key state election
Issued on: Modified:
PRESS REVIEW - Monday, September 7: The far right marches to victory in a German state election: what does this mean for the future of Germany and Europe at large? Also: the Daily Telegraph publishes an exclusive interview with the sons of former Pakistani PM Imran Khan about his imprisonment conditions in Pakistan. Plus the US Open descends into chaos after influencers, weed and disruptions stir controversy.
The far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) party has won a crucial state election but fallen just short of winning an outright majority. The AfD - an anti-immigrant, populist, far-right party - was hoping for a majority in the Saxony-Anhalt election, which would have allowed it to govern alone and overcome mainstream parties' refusal to work with it. It fell short, but its resounding victory - and thumping loss for Chancellor Frederich Merz's CDU party - is a win in itself. German tabloid Bild headlines with a play on words: "Jubel und Schmerz" - "Jubilation and pain" - pain for Chancellor Friedrich Merz and jubilation for Ulrich Siegmund, head of the AfD list in the state. The Berliner Zeitung says he gets "the last laugh today" and calls him the most dangerous man in Germany, reprising a recent headline from Der Spiegel.
Die Zeit evokes an "historic turning point for German democracy." In an article entitled the "blue storm", the daily reminds us that the AfD continues its political dominance, after becoming the main opposition party in Germany in federal elections last year. While there are more right-wing parties in power, Die Zeit says many have become more moderate in their governance, taking the example of Italy's Giorgia Meloni. However, it warns that the AfD is going in the opposite direction, becoming more radical. In another article, Die Zeit argues that this vote is also an indictment of Merz. He has lost popularity and authority in the country. To surmount this defeat, the paper suggests looking to the historical roots of the CDU party - a union, not a party, born in reaction to Nazi Germany. Its then-leader Konrad Adenauer, himself persecuted by the Nazis, became the first chancellor of Germany.
Across Europe, the press is reacting to the AfD's election win in Saxony-Anhalt. Spain's El Pais calls it an "overwhelming victory". Here in France, the left-wing daily Libération evokes the "fascist shock in Germany." There are also lots of reactions in Italy. La Republicca says that an obscurity has fallen in Berlin, noting bitterly that the EU is confronted with Nazi-era nostalgia. Left-leaning Il Fatto Quotidiano accuses Merz of handing this victory to the AfD. The right-wing paper Il Giornale is thrilled about the victory of the "euroright" but expresses caution about the AfD's manifesto, which contains themes dear to the Nazis.
In other news, the Daily Telegraph has published an exclusive interview with the sons of former Pakistani leader Imran Khan about his health. Sulaiman and Kassim Khan warn that their father's health is declining while imprisoned in Pakistan. They say the former Pakistani prime minister is living in quarters so cramped that they are usually reserved for death row inmates. The water is fetid, he has no reading material and is kept in solitary confinement for 23 hours a day. Khan, a former Pakistan cricket captain turned prime minister was thrown into prison four years ago - a coup orchestrated, he says, by his enemies. The Khan sons also accuse the British government of "being the opposite of helpful", despite the Khan family's strong roots to the country.
Finally, there's uproar at this year's US Open, which has descended into chaos. ESPN reports that the US Open organisers have accredited more influencers this year in a bid to add hype to the event. The problem is that play has been interrupted several times due to noise during points and selfies taken with spotlights. In addition, the strong odour of cannabis has been present in recent editions - cannabis is legal in New York - and the tournament feels more like a music festival than a sporting event. Wimbledon, known for its strict court etiquette, has already vowed not to allow influencers into next year's edition. You can forget about smoking - the only grass in Wimbledon is on court!
You can catch our press review every morning on France 24 at 7:20am and 9:20am (Paris time), from Monday to Friday.