Protests erupt over departure of Ukraine's defence minister
The latest cabinet reshuffle sparked rare wartime protests across Ukraine with demonstrators demanding that President Volodymyr Zelensky reappoint popular Defence Minister Mykhailo Fedorov, who resigned on Wednesday. Ukraine's parliament voted Thursday to approve energy executive Sergiy Koretsky as prime minister.
To display this content from YouTube, you must enable advertisement tracking and audience measurement.
One of your browser extensions seems to be blocking the video player from loading. To watch this content, you may need to disable it on this site.
Ukraine's parliament on Thursday approved Naftogaz boss Sergiy Koretsky as the new prime minister, part a government reshuffle ordered by President Volodymyr Zelensky. Koretsky, 48, is seen by Zelensky as a manager who can lead the country through another tough winter set to be marked by relentless Russian strikes on the energy system.
He is Ukraine's third premier since the start of Russia's full-scale invasion in 2022.
Zelensky also named Yevhen Khmara, acting chief of the security service, as interim defence chief following Fedorov's ouster and asked parliament to confirm him.
The sweeping shake-up to Ukraine's top political team triggered large protests in several cities against the removal of the popular defence minister, who said on Thursday he had declined an offer from Zelensky to become his adviser.
Fedorov also accused commander-in-chief Oleksandr Syrsky of trying to divide the war-torn country, detailing a feud between the pair that led to his removal and triggered the protests supporting him.
"Instead of figuring out how to defeat Russia asymmetrically - which is the commander-in-chief's task - he figured out how to split the country we're all living in today," Fedorov told journalists at a briefing in Kyiv.
Read moreMykhailo Fedorov: Ousted defence chief's reforms riled Ukrainian army bosses
To display this content from YouTube, you must enable advertisement tracking and audience measurement.
One of your browser extensions seems to be blocking the video player from loading. To watch this content, you may need to disable it on this site.
'A slap in the face of Ukrainians'
AFP reporters in Kyiv saw more than a thousand people gathered on a central square, singing the Ukrainian national anthem, waving Ukrainian and EU flags and chanting "shame" and "bring Fedorov back".
To display this content from X (Twitter), you must enable advertisement tracking and audience measurement.
Only appointed six months ago, Fedorov carved a reputation as a moderniser who tried to reform the Ukrainian military, worn down by more than four years of the Russian invasion.
His removal risks throwing uncertainty into the army at a time when Ukraine in one of its best positions in the war for months, having halted the pace of the Russian advance and pounding Russian oil and military sites with long-range drones.
"I believe that his dismissal is a slap in the face of the Ukrainian people," Vlada Roman, a 30-year-old business owner told AFP.
She said she hoped Zelensky would row back on the decision, saying he was "afraid of effective people".
"After today's rally he'll change his mind, I hope so."
Local media reported protests in several other cities, including Lviv, Odesa and Dnipro.
Uncertain future for Fedorov
Fedorov announced late Wednesday he was stepping down, saying it was a "great honour to serve the Ukrainian people", amid a sweeping government reshuffle ordered by Zelensky.
"In difficult moments, Zelensky behaves like a hero," wrote Vitalii Sych, chief editor of Ukrainian outlet NV. "But we should not forget that difficult moments are often caused by his idiotic decisions."
The deputy commander of Ukraine's air force Pavlo Yelizarov also resigned in protest at Fedorov's removal, calling it "a great evil" for Ukraine's defence.
"It is a great honour for me to work with Mykhailo Fedorov. In 2022, I joined the defence forces to win, not to pretend to be doing something," he said in his resignation statement.
(FRANCE 24 with AFP, Reuters, AP)