Ukraine drone attack on Moscow region wounds 10 people
A fresh Ukrainian drone attack on the Moscow region Monday night wounded at least 10 people, including a child, Russian authorities said, with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky saying the strikes had targeted an oil depot and "logistics facilities".
Ukraine launched scores of drones at the Moscow region Monday night, sparking fires and wounding at least 10 people, Russia said.
Ukraine struck Russian "logistics facilities" and an oil depot in the Moscow region more than 400km from the Ukrainian border, President Volodymyr Zelensky said on Monday.
"We are responding, justly, to every Russian strike against our cities and communities," Zelensky said in a post on X.
The strikes came after Russia hit Kyiv with ballistic missiles on Sunday and after Ukrainian strikes on Wildberries e-commerce warehouses outside Moscow killed eight warehouse workers on Saturday.
Kyiv has for months intensified its retaliatory strikes on Russia, causing fuel shortages and disrupting ordinary life more than ever during Moscow's more than four-year offensive in Ukraine.
Russia said it downed almost 400 drones in the region around the capital, now a regular target of Ukraine's attacks.
Moscow Region Governor Andrei Vorobyov said 10 people, including a child, were wounded.
Three of the wounded were Chinese citizens, he said.
He said "several private homes" were damaged in Podolsk, south of Moscow.
One person was wounded after a drone fell near their car on a motorway, Vorobyov said.
He said the towns of Domodedovo - which hosts an international airport - and Odintsovo were also hit.
Read moreNo fuel, no patience: Russians endure fuel shortages
Wildberries, Russia's largest online retailer, said on Monday its logistics centre in the Podolsk district had been evacuated as a precaution but later resumed normal operations.
Domodedovo's mayor Yevgeniya Khrustaleva said in a statement on Telegram that a fire had broken out at a local industrial park, and that a residential building had also been struck.
Further south, on the Ukrainian border, the governor of Belgorod region said that one person had been killed and four wounded by a drone attack on a village close to the frontier.
Moscow Mayor Sergei Sobyanin said 85 drones were shot down as they approached the Russian capital.
A day earlier, a Russian ballistic missile attack killed one person and wounded 16 in Ukraine's capital, Kyiv said.
Russia has hit Ukraine's capital with a series of deadly missile strikes this summer, with June seeing the most civilian casualties in Ukraine since 2022.
Kyiv says its strikes on Russia - which have hit as far as the Urals and Siberia - are intended to damage Moscow's war effort as well as force the Kremlin to negotiate.
(FRANCE 24 with AFP and Reuters)