Trump lashes out at 'fake news' and jokes about 2028 presidential run in press gala do-over
US President Donald Trump delivered an at-times rambling speech at the rescheduled White House Correspondents' Dinner Friday, three months after an alleged assassination attempt brought the annual event to an abrupt halt. Trump notably joked about running for a third presidential term in 2028, which is barred under the US Constitution.
US President Donald Trump lashed out at "fake news media" and talked about serving a banned third term as he addressed a rescheduled White House Correspondents' Dinner Friday, three months after the event was disrupted by an apparent assassination attempt.
"This place is really the largest group of Trump derangement syndrome people ever put together at one time," Trump told the media gala at the Waldorf Astoria hotel in Washington.
The 80-year-old started with a relatively conciliatory tone, reflecting on the attack by a gunman that forced him to be evacuated from the dinner in April.
"The show must go on," Trump said.
But he quickly pivoted to attacking a wide range of perceived enemies in an often rambling speech, starting with journalists before training his fire on Democratic opponents.
Trump had earlier thrown up his hands and laughed as he shook hands with a Wall Street Journal team that broke stories on his ties to disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein.
Watch moreTrump assassination attempt at press gala: Mainstream media and conspiracy theories
But he later joked that "this has not been an easy evening, all these awards", Trump said after journalists received prizes for their reporting on the Republican's second presidency.
Trump also revived talk about serving a third term, which is barred under the US Constitution, even as he insisted he was joking.
"Just like my presidency, the second time is always better. And the third time is better yet," Trump said, before adding: "I'm only kidding."
He later doubled down, pulling out a red "Trump 2028" cap and saying he was "pleased to announce my intention to - and this is a somewhat of a scoop - my intention to run for a fourth term as president of the United States".
Trump also spoke about the flip side of his attacks on the press: the unprecedented access he has provided by engaging in frequent question-and-answer sessions with reporters and personally taking phone calls from many of them.
"I always find that when you don't speak to the press, you always get a bad story," said Trump, whose relationship with the press goes back decades to his rise as a well-known New York real estate developer in the 1980s. "When you do speak to the press, you have a shot at getting a good story."
Much of Trump's speech seemed to recycle his campaign-style rallies, with the president even jokingly lambasting his speech writers when some lines fell flat.
When one joke bombed, Trump remarked, "That was actually the only thing I thought was good in this whole freaking stupid speech."
But he ended the hour-long speech by saying he had "tremendous respect" for the journalists in the room - while adding: "When I'm gone you're all going to be broke."
'Let's try this again'
Trump, who was attending his first White House Correspondents Dinner after years of bad blood with the press, added that he planned to come next year too.
He returned amid heightened security Friday, three months after an alleged assassination attempt forced his chaotic evacuation from the event after gunshots were fired at the Washington Hilton and the black-tie dinner was called off.
California man Cole Allen, 31, has pleaded not guilty to charges including attempting to kill the president.
This time the US Secret Service took no chances. Police and National Guard officers sealed off nearby roads and threw up a major security cordon, although guests passing through faced only a cursory check.
The venue was changed from the Hilton to the Waldorf Astoria, a former Trump hotel.
"Let's try this again," said CBS correspondent Weijia Jiang, the outgoing president of the White House Correspondents' Association, who presided over the previous dinner.
"Tonight our message is this: We are back. We will not be intimidated. We will not let an act of violence have the final word."
Incoming WHCA president Jacqui Heinrich said the event would return to the Washington Hilton next year.
Press freedom advocates have criticised the Trump administration over lawsuits it has filed against media organisations, restrictions on some journalists' access, and threats of action against broadcasters. He rejects the criticism, saying his administration is promoting accountability and addressing bias.
Friday's event also honoured Secret Service officer Victor Gonzales, who was shot at a security checkpoint outside the ballroom in April and is credited with stopping the attack, and the Washington Hilton staff who assisted guests. Gonzales survived wearing a protective vest.
(FRANCE 24 with AFP and Reuters)