BRICS leaders call for 'maximum restraint' as Middle East war threatens unity
BRICS leaders meeting in New Delhi on Saturday unanimously adopted a joint declaration expressing "deep concern" over the war in the Middle East and urging maximum restraint. The statement was seen as indirect criticism of US and Israeli strikes on Iranian nuclear facilities.
The BRICS group of emerging economies on Saturday unanimously adopted a joint declaration expressing "deep concern" over the war in the Middle East and urged maximum restraint, advocating for a "multilateral approach" that respects national viewpoints.
The declaration, adopted on the first day of the BRICS leaders' annual summit in New Delhi, comes at a time when US and Iran have resumed tit-for-tat strikes against each other, after a pause in fighting for much of August.
"We express deep concern over the continued escalation of tensions in the Middle East ... call for exercising maximum restraint ... avoiding actions that could further aggravate the situation," the 'New Delhi Declaration' said.
The declaration also reiterated the commitment of member nations to a peaceful resolution of international disputes "through dialogue, consultation, and diplomacy".
In addition, they voiced concerns about the rise of "unilateral tariff and non-tariff measures" that distort trade, against the backdrop of US sanctions against Tehran amid its war with the country, and against Russia over its conflict with Ukraine
The meeting, which included Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian, voiced concern over "deliberate attacks" on civilian infrastructure and peaceful nuclear facilities under UN atomic energy safeguards, saying nuclear safety and security must be protected during armed conflicts. The statement was seen as indirect criticism of US and Israeli strikes on Iranian nuclear facilities.
The leaders also took aim at unilateral sanctions not authorised by the UN Security Council. They did not name any countries, but Russia, one of the founding members of BRICS, has faced Western sanctions following its full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022.
"We call for the elimination of such unlawful measures, which undermine international law and the principles and purposes of the UN Charter," the joint statement said.
BRICS was founded in 2006 by Brazil, Russia, India and China, with South Africa joining in 2010. It has since expanded to 11 members, representing about half the world's population and a significant share of global economic output. The group has increasingly called for greater representation for developing countries in global institutions.
It has sought to raise its profile by promoting alternatives to Western-dominated financial institutions and positioning itself as the voice of developing nations and emerging economies.
India is hosting this year's summit, attended by Russian President Vladimir Putin, Chinese President Xi Jinping, Pezeshkian and counterparts from the other eight BRICS members.
Concerns have grown that the Iran war, triggered by US-Israeli strikes on February 28, may expand as fighting escalated between Saudi Arabia and Yemen's Houthi rebels. Wars in Ukraine and the Middle East, along with rising US-China tensions, are also testing the bloc's ability to find common ground among countries with competing geopolitical interests.
Read moreIndia welcomes Russia, Iran leaders for BRICS summit overshadowed by war
Saturday's talks began with an address by Modi, who sought to ease concerns that BRICS was intended to counter Western-led alliances, while portraying the grouping as a platform for emerging and developing economies to have a greater voice in global affairs.
"BRICS is not against anyone," he said, adding that the bloc had reached a "coming of age" moment in which the Global South must evolve into a "rule-shaper" in global governance.
"It is time for us to translate our unity and consensus in BRICS into concrete outcomes," he said.
Modi also proposed a BRICS seafarers' network to strengthen the safety and welfare of maritime workers, particularly as disruptions to maritime trade from the war in Iran have heightened risks for mariners.
China and Russia see BRICS as a way to reduce Western dominance, particularly that of the United States, while strengthening cooperation among emerging and developing economies.
Putin called for expanding the UN Security Council to give greater representation to Asia, Africa and Latin America, saying it would improve the body's effectiveness, Russian state news agency Interfax reported Saturday.
Speaking at the summit, Putin said the shift toward a multipolar world was facing resistance from countries "accustomed to thinking in colonial categories," accusing them of using tariffs, sanctions and "brute force" to contain rising competitors.
He said the tensions were undermining the international system but stressed that Russia still viewed the UN Charter as the foundation of international law.
Iran has also pushed for mechanisms that could reduce the bloc's reliance on Western financial systems and shield members from economic pressure, as Tehran faces sweeping sanctions and a US blockade.
Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian backed expanding trade in national currencies among BRICS members.
"One of the most important steps is to expand the use of national currencies in trade among the members," he told reporters on Friday.
China, meanwhile, is leveraging the grouping to deepen its influence within the bloc and position it as a counterweight to US power.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Mao Ning said Friday that Xi was expected to discuss major international issues and ways to deepen cooperation among BRICS members.
For India, the summit highlights its effort to maintain strategic ties with Russia and Iran while deepening relations with the US and Europe. New Delhi has sought to balance its longstanding partnerships with Moscow and Tehran with efforts to expand economic, defence and technology ties with Washington and other Western nations.
India has maintained close ties with both Moscow and Tehran despite the war in Ukraine and tensions between Iran and the US, while calling for dialogue and diplomacy to resolve conflicts. Modi met Putin and Pezeshkian separately in New Delhi on Friday ahead of the summit.
India is also hoping the forum will help ease its longstanding strained ties with China. Modi and Xi are expected to hold talks later Saturday, a meeting that could help consolidate a diplomatic thaw between the two countries after border tensions escalated in 2020.
In May, BRICS foreign ministers failed to agree on a joint statement over the Iran war, forcing India to issue a chair's summary instead.
(FRANCE 24 with AP and Reuters)