Israel's Netanyahu says co-pilot tried to crash Tel Aviv-bound plane
Issued on: Modified:
PRESS REVIEW - Thursday, October 1: A FlyDubai flight was diverted to Saudi Arabia after the pilot was stabbed by his co-pilot in what the Israeli media are calling a terror attack. The co-pilot was detained by off-duty pilots on board and passengers before making a safe landing in Saudi Arabia. Also in the news, Cornell University's college campus culture is back under scrutiny after a shocking sexual assault claim. Plus, a man learns that Singapore does not take AI slop lightly.
The terrifying events on a FlyDubai plane that was heading to Tel Aviv are dominating the press. The captain was stabbed by his co-pilot, who was then restrained by passengers and off-duty pilots on board. The plane was diverted to Saudi Arabia, where it safely landed, but not before a terrifying nosedive. According to Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, the co-pilot who stabbed the captain was an Omani national who aimed to crash the plane.
One India and the Daily Telegraph evoke this would-be attack as "Israel's 9/11", although the co-pilot's motivations for the stabbing are yet to be revealed. The Jerusalem Post reports on the "heroic actions of Israelis" who stormed the cockpit to thwart the attacker. The paper reports that luckily, four flyDubai pilots were on board on standby due to regional rerouting that could delay flight times and require extra pilots. The centre-left paper Haaretz notes that Israel was "moments away from one of its worst terror attacks". The incident also comes at a crucial time in Israel and could serve Netanyahu well ahead of legislative elections next month. The French-language Lebanese daily L'Orient-Le Jour notes that the "hypothesis of terror" has entered the electoral campaign in Israel.
In the US, the botched execution of a death row prisoner is shedding light on the shortcomings of the justice system. As The New York Times reports, Christa Pike has been on death row for 30 years for the brutal murder of a classmate when she was 18. She was due to be executed this week but got an eleventh-hour reprieve. She was then given two lethal injections but somehow survived and is now being treated in hospital. An opinion writer for MS NOW argues that Pike's guilt was never in question, but her childhood sexual abuse, mental illness and PTSD could have been a factor in her committing murder. The author says: "Her case is a reminder that lives of capital defendants are often shaped by brutality and violence" and makes a case for clemency.
Meanwhile, the fallout from the alleged 2024 sexual assault of a student at Cornell University continues to make headlines. In a six-page statement, the victim known as Jane Doe alleged she was subjected to hours-long sexual attacks by seven members of a fraternity club. The case is back in the spotlight now after the woman sued the university for failing to properly handle her sexual assault complaint. It has also sparked soul-searching and a review of college campus culture. The Washington Post analyses three chilling words reportedly revealed from a group chat during the assault: "Shop still open?" It says the "very presence of a group text regarding this alleged assault is both gob smacking and banal". It conveys that whatever was happening that room, several people thought to document it in real time and make it a bonding experience.
Finally, a man has learned the hard way that Singapore is not a country that takes AI slop lightly. According to Gizmodo and the Straits Times, a man in Singapore thought it would be a great laugh to share an AI-generated image of a crocodile in a reservoir at a popular public park. Unfortunately, the park's staff took the image very seriously, shutting down the park and spending two days looking for the non-existent crocodile. It was then reported to police and the man in question, Myanmar national Ye Lin, has been charged and faces possible prison time for sharing a false image. He's also charged with obstruction of justice for deleting the image and the AI programme he used to create it. So learn your lesson: AI slop is no laughing matter in Singapore!
You can catch our press review every morning on France 24 at 7:20am and 9:20am (Paris time), from Monday to Friday.