Nevada wildfire forces tens of thousands to evacuate as blaze threatens city of Reno
Tens of thousands of people faced another night away from home on Monday as a wind-driven wildfire threatened Reno, Nevada, blanketing the city in smoke and closing schools. About 24,000 people remained under evacuation orders, down from more than 40,000 at the peak, while tens of thousands more were on alert.
Tens of thousands of people looked set to spend another night away from home Monday as a wind-driven fire bore down on the western US city of Reno.
Schools were shut as smoke swathed the city in Nevada, near the California border, which is home to around 280,000 people.
Around 24,000 were still under evacuation orders on Monday, officials said, down from over 40,000 at its peak. Tens of thousands more have been put on alert and told to prepare bags and be ready to go at a moment's notice.
The Hawk Fire began on Saturday and grew to over 15,000 acres (6,000 hectares) by Monday, but firefighters said they had corralled the blaze along 27 percent of its perimeter - some of which lies just five miles (eight kilometers) northwest of Reno.
No deaths have been reported, but seven people have been injured, including three first responders. At least 32 properties have been completely destroyed and several others damaged.
Officials said they expected that number to rise as firefighters were able to get to the interior of the fire.
Truckee Meadows Fire Chief Richard Edwards told a press conference on Monday that the blaze was "human caused".
"We do not know if it was intentional or unintentional. So the investigators are still working through that right now. More than likely, this fire will be classified as undetermined."
More than 900 firefighters were tackling the blaze, using fire engines, helicopters and bulldozers, in an effort to clear the tinder-dry brush. Teams from Australia and New Zealand were among those taking part in the effort, alongside colleagues from all over the United States.
Edwards earlier urged people to be ready to evacuate immediately when told to do so.
"The Hawk Fire is a very dynamic incident for us as it's being driven by the winds. The wind-driven fires move very rapidly into our residential areas," he said.
"If you have been told to evacuate, please don't wait!" Reno Mayor Hillary Schieve said.
(FRANCE 24 with AFP)