Trump says unified Ireland 'would be fantastic' during Dublin trip
US President Donald Trump on Saturday said a unified Ireland would be "fantastic" during a weekend visit to a major tournament at his Irish golf course. The two-day trip to Ireland is the latest example of how the US leader blends his official duties with his personal interests.
US President Donald Trump said Saturday that a unified Ireland would be "fantastic," wading into a complex and politically charged subject during a weekend visit to a major tournament at his Irish golf course
At a meeting with Irish Prime Minister Micheal Martin in Dublin, Trump said he would love to see the reunification of the Republic of Ireland with the UK's Northern Ireland.
"I don't want to cause any problems but I'd love to see it unified," Trump said. "It's going to happen eventually. It may as well happen now.
"I think it would be a fantastic thing," he said, adding that "the UK will have something to say about it, obviously."
The US president touched down at Dublin airport in his Qatari-gifted plane shortly before 8:25am (07:25 GMT), AFP reporters saw.
At least 4,000 police and other personnel, including snipers, have been mobilised for the visit, in what has been dubbed one of the biggest security operations ever mounted in Ireland.
Thousands of anti-Trump protesters are planning to rally in Dublin, where the US leader is holding separate meetings with Ireland's leaders.
Trump is then due to fly to his luxury resort in Doonbeg, on Ireland's west coast, where some of the world's top golfers are competing in the Irish Open tournament.
The golf-mad president - whose relaxed relationship with the game's rules was documented by sports journalist Rick Reilly in the 2019 book "Commander in Cheat" - may even award the trophy on Sunday.
"He's really just visiting the golf resort he owns and dropping into Dublin for a courtesy visit," Daniel Geary, a US history professor at Trinity College Dublin, told AFP.
"He sees little difference between his private interests and his role as president."
'Business'
The 80-year-old billionaire has promoted his family's golf business unabashedly since returning to the White House for his second stint as president in January 2025.
Last summer, he welcomed then-UK Prime Minister Keir Starmer and European Union chief Ursula von der Leyen to his plush resort at Turnberry on the west coast of Scotland.
Trump then inaugurated another golf course bearing his name in the town of Balmedie, near Aberdeen on the northeast Scottish coast.
"He certainly sends a message that he is passionately interested in his own family's business," University of Minnesota law professor Richard Painter said ahead of the Ireland trip.
"It's not going to help the Republican party in the midterms to have the president... promoting his golf courses for the super-wealthy, when other people are having trouble making ends meet," the expert on government ethics added.
Read moreTrump's sale of access to Truth Social raises eyebrows
The security operation for Trump's visit is reportedly costing Ireland 20 million euros ($23 million) and comes as the country already grapples with a massive policing operation for its six-month presidency of the EU.
Trump's attendance at Doonbeg - a remote, coastal site in County Clare that the Trump Organization purchased in 2014 - adds an extra layer of complexity to the security effort.
Some 40,000 fans are expected at the tournament over the weekend, with six-time major winner and current world number two Rory McIlroy the main draw.
McIlroy, who has played golf with Trump, told the BBC this week that the tournament will feel "different" with the US president on site, but that the players will just "keep our heads down and play".
'Short and courteous'
Trump's first meeting is with Connolly, who occupies the largely ceremonial role of president. She is a left-winger and Trump critic, who is under pressure to raise Gaza during their discussions.
Trump will then see Irish leader Martin, whom he has hosted twice in the Oval Office and appears to get on well with.
The Middle East, including America's and Israel's war on Iran, and US tariffs on EU pharmaceuticals and immigration are likely to be on the agenda.
Ireland and the United States have long been close allies, partly because of their common ancestral ties.
But the Irish government's politics diverge sharply with that of the Trump administration on many issues - particularly support for the Palestinians.
Ireland is among several countries, including Spain, the UK and France, that have announced a trade ban targeting Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank.
"Martin is experienced enough that it should be fine at the political level. The big uncertainty is President Connolly," Eoin O'Malley, a political scientist at Dublin City University, told AFP.
"She protested against his last visit (in 2019), and her supporters will expect her to make some show for them. But she's also aware that she cannot do or say anything that might inflict damage on the relationship.
"I expect it will be short and courteous."
(FRANCE 24 with AFP and AP)