After meeting with US envoys in Kyiv, Zelensky says war likely to 'continue in winter'
Although Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky described talks with US special envoy Steve Witkoff and Donald Trump's son-in-law Jared Kushner as "substantial", he warned that the war with Russia was likely to continue this winter. The US envoys arrived in Kyiv for their first official visit on Sunday, a day after meeting Russia's President Vladimir Putin in Moscow. Read our blog to see how the day's events unfolded.
US envoys have left Kyiv after talks with Zelensky
US President Donald Trump's two envoys have left Kyiv after talks with Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky, the country's rail service operator said Monday.
"We sent off Steve Witkoff and Jared Kushner's special train," Ukrainian Railways said in a post on Telegram.
Zelensky holding more talks with Witkoff, Kushner over 'more effective' proposals
US envoys Jared Kushner and Steve Witkoff brought new, possibly more workable proposals on ending the war with Russia to Kyiv and President Volodymyr Zelensky is holding another meeting with them in a trio format, a senior Ukrainian presidential official said.
"It's not the same as it was before. This one now is more effective," the source said, adding: "They're still talking. This is actually the most important part. There are three of them now."
Zelensky thanks US envoys for Kyiv visit
Video: 'Cordial' meeting with US envoys, but Zelensky 'talking as though war will continue'
The meetings between Donald Trump's special peace envoys and Volodymyr Zelensky in Kyiv may have been very polite and cordial, but the Ukrainian president's comments afterward suggests that the Americans presented much of the same peace proposals as before and that Zelensky believes the war will continue for now, Gulliver Cragg, FRANCE 24's correspondent in Ukraine explained.
Watch the full video below:
Zelensky says only leaders meeting can solve territorial issue
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky said that territorial issues can only be resolved "at the level of leaders" after talks with US envoys on ending the war with Russia.
Zelensky has previously called for a meeting with Russia's Vladimir Putin.
In pictures: President Zelensky's press conference with US envoys
Photos: Reuters
Both Russia and Ukraine need to make 'compromises' for war to end, Witkoff says
US envoy Steve Witkoff said both Russia and Ukraine need to make "some compromises and narrow the issues between them" to end four years of war.
"It is very difficult but we are committed, we care and we hope all of that leads to a successful peaceful diplomatic resolution," he said.
War looks likely to continue in winter, Zelensky says
Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky said that while there was a "positive assessment" of talks with US envoys visiting Kyiv, the war with Russia "at the moment" looked likely to continue this winter.
"We very much hope that we will be able to reach agreements with our American partners, and we are counting on the support of our European partners -if the war continues in winter, and this is how it appears at the moment - but even so, the teams today have a positive assessment of our future prospects," he said.
Zelensky describes talks with US envoys as 'very substantial'
Ukraine's talks with US peace negotiators Steve Witkoff and Jared Kushner were "very substantial", President Volodymyr Zelensky said.
Zelensky told reporters that they discussed security and economic guarantees for Ukraine and also supplies of air-defence missiles and a winter support package. He also hoped that trilateral talks, including Ukraine, Russia and the US would restart soon.
In pictures: Trump's envoys attend talks in Kyiv
US Special Envoy Steve Witkoff and Jared Kushner, US President Donald Trump's son-in-law, attend a meeting with Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky and representatives of Britain, France and Germany in Kyiv, on September 6, 2026.
Photos: Reuters
US envoys equipped with 'few new ideas', looking to revive old proposals, FT reports
Citing sources, the Financial Times reports that Steve Witkoff and Jared Kushner have brought "few new ideas" with them to Kyiv and are mainly seeking to revive earlier proposals to end the war.
The documents the duo is presenting, the FT's Ukraine correspondent Christopher Miller writes on X, are updated versions of previous proposals that have been "revised to reflect the changed circumstances since peace negotiations stalled in February, at the outset of the US war with Iran".
One of the central issues is the remaining Ukrainian-held territory in Donbas - estimated at around 25 percent - which Russia has claimed but has so far been unable to capture.
Kushner hopes talks will lead to 'new ways to advance' peace
"Hopefully this trip has come out with some new ways to advance forward. I think we've learned a lot from the trip," US President Donald Trump's son-in-law Jared Kushner said after holding talks with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky.
Russia says it has struck Ukrainian cargo vessel in Black Sea
The Russian defence ministry said its forces have struck a Ukrainian cargo vessel in the Black Sea, which it said was carrying military equipment supplied to the Ukrainian army by Western countries, Russian news agencies reported.
Kushner says looking forward to more progress in peace talks
The US delegation visiting Kyiv is looking forward to making more progress in peace talks aimed at ending the war in Ukraine, US envoy Jared Kushner said.
In joint statements to reporters after the first round of talks, fellow envoy Steve Witkoff said the US team had been "very encouraged" by what he described as a "substantive, important" discussion.
🎥 Ukraine-Russia talks: What are the US objectives?
US envoys Steve Witkoff and Jared Kushner arrived in Kyiv on their first official visit to Ukraine as part of a renewed push for peace, more than 4 years after Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine.
We discuss this topic with our guest, John E. Herbst, director of the Eurasia Center at the Atlantic Council.
Third meeting with US envoys in Kyiv underway, now with European representatives, source says
A senior Ukrainian official, who spoke to the Associated Press on condition of anonymity, said Sunday afternoon that two rounds of discussion had taken place with the US officials, and that a third meeting with the European representatives was underway.
Much of the discussion was focused on "how to get through the winter and what can be done before then," he said.
Ukraine's military says it has hit several targets in Russia, including an oil refinery
Pope calls for peace in Ukraine
In pictures: US envoys visits Kyiv cathedral
Photos: Ukrainian Presidential Press Office via AP
(FRANCE 24 with AFP, AP and Reuters)