From 'Jungle' to jungles, migrants in Calais continue to dream of UK
Issued on:
October 2026 marks 10 years since the Calais "Jungle" in northern France was dismantled by French police. The camp was home to thousands of migrants who wanted to cross the Channel and reach the UK. A decade on, migrants continue to dream of reaching British shores and the "Jungle" has been replaced by many smaller jungles scattered along the northern French coastline. FRANCE 24's Pauline Godart, Claire Paccalin and Mohamed Farhat report.
"Everyone here dreams of the UK," says Rashid, as he makes Assida, a staple Sudanese dish, over a campfire in a wooded area near the hospital in Calais. He arrived in the northern French city four months ago and is saving up to pay people smugglers so he can cross the Channel.
Ten years after French police cleared the big "Jungle" camp in Calais in October 2016, people from dozens of different countries continue to arrive in northern France in the hope of crossing to the UK.
For the last decade, French authorities have maintained a policy of "zero fixation points" in order to prevent another large "Jungle", with slum-like conditions, from appearing. They regularly move migrants on, confiscating their tents, placing boulders on the ground and cutting down trees used for shelter. Rashid has had to repitch his tent several times since he arrived.
But the clearances have meant there are now dozens of smaller jungles, spread across a wider stretch of coastline, as migrants set up camps temporarily before they're dismantled by police. The camps reappear within hours.
Another change since 2016 is how smugglers operate. Ten years ago, they got migrants to hide in lorries bound for the UK. But when police cracked down, smugglers switched tactics. Today, they opt for small, makeshift boats, which has made the journey even more perilous.
Despite the dangers, every year, tens of thousands still risk their lives crossing irregularly to England's shores, convinced that a better life awaits them on the other side of the Channel.