Haiti gangs kill at least 47 people in attack near the capital
Gang members killed at least 47 people and wounded more than 22 near Haiti's capital, the UN said on Monday. The victims were killed in an overnight attack in Kenscoff, in the hills above Haiti's capital of Port-au-Prince.
At least 47 people have been killed and 22 more wounded in an overnight gang raid on a neighbourhood overlooking Haiti's capital of Port-au-Prince, the UN said on Monday, prompting anger over the lack of protection from repeated deadly attacks.
The United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti said estimates could still change.
The hillside community of Kenscoff, whose strategic position overlooks routes into the capital, has suffered a dozen attacks by armed gangs since last year, forcing thousands to flee their homes.
For years, powerful gangs under a broad alliance have cemented their influence over Haiti's capital and expanded into nearby regions, despite attempts by foreign nations to reinforce the country's outgunned police.
Haitian rights group RNDDH (Réseau National de Défense des Droits Humains) initially estimated that 30 to 40 people had been killed and 15 to 20 wounded in the raid, which began around 10:30pm local time, but said it was difficult to assess a complete tally. The number of deaths has since risen to 47, with injuries now tallying at over 20.
Even as Haiti's government decried a "heinous attack" and promised to reinforce security, residents demanded the local police chief step down, saying officers failed to protect people killed just minutes from the police station.
"Kenscoff will not be abandoned," the prime minister's office said on social media. "The government's authority will be restored, without weakness and without delay."
Forced to flee Kenscoff
Attacks in Kenscoff over two months in early 2025 saw more than 260 people killed and 200 homes destroyed or set on fire, forcing 3,000 people to flee, according to UN estimates.
Nearly a dozen more attacks have taken place since, including rapes, kidnapping, arson and livestock theft.
"My family are victims," said Coriolan Kendy, standing by his cousin's body, lying on the road in a blood-stained sheet.
"People in Kenscoff are suffering and the government is to blame."
Another resident, Orisme, who did not share his last name, pleaded for the prime minister's support. "We live in humiliation and they do nothing for us," he said.
Some residents said several dozen police had tried to rebuff the armed men during the night, and some were injured. They added that they did not identify gang members among the dead.
Local media said several houses were set on fire, including the home of Jean William Pape, a leading public health expert.
"The police never gave up," national police chief Vladimir Paraison told reporters during a visit to Kenscoff later in the day.
Kenscoff overlooks routes into Petion-Ville - home to several embassies, upscale hotels and the temporary seat of government - as well as a major road from the capital into southern Haiti.
Read moreHaiti schedules December presidential election despite security concerns
The violence may deepen concerns over Haiti's ability to hold an election in December, its first in a decade. Successive governments have repeatedly postponed elections as armed gangs have expanded their influence.
The UN-backed Gang Suppression Force, which is mandated to help police fight gangs, aims to reach a capacity of more than 5,500 troops this autumn.
A spokesperson did not immediately respond to questions on whether the troops were reinforcing Kenscoff security.
(FRANCE 24 with AFP)