Trump says record Navy deployment in Iran operations 'not nearly long enough'
US President Donald Trump on Friday dismissed concerns about the toll on sailors aboard the aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln, who have endured a record deployment of almost nine months, saying that the deployment had been "not nearly long enough". The Lincoln has been supporting the US war against Iran, and reports have emerged of sailors struggling with mental health issues.
US President Donald Trump on Friday downplayed the toll on American sailors enduring a record-setting deployment of nearly nine months on the USS Abraham Lincoln as concerns escalated about mental health and supply issues aboard the aircraft carrier supporting US operations against Iran.
In a brief exchange with reporters before flying to New York for an event to highlight falling violent crime rates across the US, Trump refuted that family members have raised concerns about the deployment's length and even said that the more than 260-day deployment is "not nearly long enough."
"That ship is moving right now, or very shortly, and it's being replaced with another very similar ship," Trump said when asked about the lengthy deployment.
The Lincoln has been supporting the US war against Iran, and several Democratic lawmakers, including Sens. Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut and Ruben Gallego of Arizona, are pressing for accountability from the Pentagon over conditions aboard the carrier, which Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth on Thursday said were "completely misrepresented".
Rep. Jason Crow, D-Colo., who served three tours in Iraq and Afghanistan with the 82nd Airborne Division and 75th Ranger Regiment before being elected, took to social media to criticize Trump's comments, saying on X that "President Trump does not care about our servicemembers or their families".
Extended deployments of carriers during the Iran conflict have raised concerns about the impact on service members who are away from home for long periods as well as the increasing strain on the ship and its equipment.
While hostilities between the US and Iran have calmed in recent weeks, the Navy has reimposed a blockade on Iranian ports in the crucial Strait of Hormuz, and the Trump administration has offered no clarity on how it intends to wind down the war. Hegseth said that the US military can maintain the blockage of Iranian ports "indefinitely".
Another aircraft carrier, the USS George Washington, left port in Da Nang, Vietnam, last week, and is expected to replace the USS Lincoln, one of two aircraft carriers currently deployed in the Middle East.
Read moreIran vows to keep Strait of Hormuz closed until US meets demands
After reports emerged that sailors on the Lincoln are struggling with mental health concerns, the Navy said it has "not observed an increase in suicidal ideations or attempts aboard the ship", though officials have declined to provide data, citing operational security and patient privacy concerns.
A Navy official said that a sailor aboard the Lincoln went overboard in early August but that the person was quickly recovered, treated by the ship's medical department and transferred off ship for follow-on care. The official would not say whether it was being considered a suicide attempt.
US Central Command, which oversees military operations in the Middle East, has also pushed back on reports about poor conditions.
(FRANCE 24 with AP)