Disappointed France and England to face off in third place World Cup match
France and England meet for their final World Cup match on Saturday competing for third place after failing to reach Sunday's final. Neither of the disappointed teams seems to relish the prospect of the clash: "The best thing for France and England would be for this match not to exist," said France coach Didier Deschamps.
Playing your final World Cup match one day prior to the championship game is not the assignment anybody desires.
But it's the reality for France and England as the two countries will take the field in the third-place match on Saturday in Miami Gardens, Florida.
"None of our players, and none of the French players, wants to play the third- place match," England coach Thomas Tuchel said. "They want to play the final. We gave everything to achieve it."
England missed out on the title match after allowing two late goals to Argentina to fall 2-1 on Wednesday in the semifinals. One day earlier, France came up short when largely outplayed in a 2-0 loss to Spain.
France coach Didier Deschamps isn't the least bit thrilled about competing for the consolation prize.
"The best thing for France and England would be for this match not to exist," Deschamps said.
The contest will be the final one as Les Bleus coach for the 57-year-old Deschamps, whose 14-year tenure includes guiding the nation to the 2018 World Cup crown.
"I know that it's the last match and I don't want anybody to cry, and I don't think anybody here will cry," Deschamps said. "I had the privilege to go through amazing moments and to go also through some more difficult moments, so the end is coming near but life goes on."
Read moreGolden era ends for Deschamps' France as Midas touch deserts Les Bleus
France star Kylian Mbappé is tied with Argentina's Lionel Messi with eight goals in the Golden Boot competition. Mbappe is the defending winner after also having eight goals in 2022.
But first, Mbappé is coping with the fact that his side didn't reach the final.
"As the captain, I have to take all the responsibility," Mbappé said of falling against Spain. "I have no problem with that. We wanted to go to the final. We didn't go."
Mbappé has 20 career World Cup goals, one behind Messi's record.
Three other players in this match are second-hand contenders for the Golden Boot: England's Jude Bellingham and Harry Kane have scored six goals and France's Ousmane Dembele is a longshot at five.
Kane won the 2018 Golden Boot with six goals. This will be the final World Cup match of his "prime" as he turns 33 on July 28.
It could conceivably be his final World Cup match, but Kane isn't ready to discuss that possibility.
"It's too early to talk about that," Kane said. "I mean, as a person, it's always just about taking it year by year and how I feel. The national team is my pride and joy. It's what I love to do most, more than anything.
"Obviously, four years is a long way away. I'm 33 in the summer, but as you saw on the other end with Messi (who is 39) there, he's still performing at the highest level. So, I never want to put a limit on these things."
Kane and Bellingham have had standout World Cup performances for the Three Lions despite the disappointment of not reaching the final.
Tuchel has been roundly criticized for his tactics after England went up 1-0 in the 55th minute against Argentina on Anthony Gordon's goal.
England loaded up the back end and played passively on offense. Instead of seeking a two-goal lead, England were playing not to be tied.
The strategy was foiled as Argentina scored goals in the 85th minute and the second minute of stoppage time to dash the dreams of English fans.
"No regrets, the team gave everything, and we were very, very close," Tuchel said. "We deserved to be up one-nil. We played one of our better matches, maybe the best match. The team was top, but we couldn't bring it over the line. No regrets."
(FRANCE 24 with Reuters)