- Published
Tickets for Tyson Fury and Anthony Joshua's fight at Cardiff's Principality Stadium have sold out in just one hour.
Fury and Joshua will meet on a bill that begins on 11 December but they are not expected to fight until the early hours of 12 December.
The highest-priced tickets were available at £13,128, including booking fees, with the lowest at £88.50.
The all-British heavyweight contest, which will be broadcast globally on Netflix, was announced in September and around 80,000 tickets went on sale at 12:00 BST on Friday.
Just minutes after the tickets went on sale more than 500,000 people were waiting in the online queue.
Tickets quickly began emerging on resale websites, with ringside VIP seats being advertised for £73,645, while upper tier seats were available for £425.
Ringwalks are expected to start around 01:00 GMT on Saturday 12 December, following a short live music performance, and the stadium will remain open until 03:30.
The event is being promoted as a collaboration between Saudi boxing powerbroker Turki Alalshikh's The Ring and UFC chief Dana White.
Organisers are yet to confirm any of the undercard fights.
Joshua, 36, and Fury, 38 - both former two-time world champions - signed contracts for the bout earlier this year, but the date and venue had yet to be confirmed.
London's Wembley Stadium and New York's Madison Square Garden were the frontrunners to stage the fight, but both presented issues before Cardiff emerged as an alternative.
The Principality Stadium has hosted late-night boxing before, including Joe Calzaghe's fight with Mikkel Kessler in November 2007, which began at 01:00 GMT.
Ricky Hatton's victory over Kostya Tszyu at Manchester's MEN Arena in 2005 began at about 02:00 local time, allowing US broadcaster Showtime to show the fight on Saturday evening.
Just 11 days ago, there was uncertainty over whether the fight would even take place due to a dispute over the role of UFC chief White in the promotion of the event.
Broadcaster Netflix said Alalshikh's The Ring and White would collaborate to promote the event, but Joshua's promoter Eddie Hearn said his fighter's contract prevented White from having a promotional role.
The British rivals finally met at a news conference on 30 September to begin the build-up to one of the most anticipated fights in British history.
Fury and Joshua are reported to be sharing a purse worth close to $200m (£151m)