- Published
Serious disorder at a balloon release for one of the young men who died in the A66 car crash is "unacceptable", an MP has said.
Durham Police said a large crowd gathered on a privately owned field near Haswell, County Durham, on Thursday evening where five vehicles were set on fire and balloons, flares, and fireworks were released.
Redcar MP Anna Turley said it put lives at risk, while Assistant Chief Constable Jon McAdam said the force condemned "anyone who would use that tragedy as an excuse for disorder".
In an update on Friday afternoon, Cleveland Police ACC Dave Sutherland said the force was not currently linking the A66 crash to a house fire which killed a woman and a seven-year-old girl.
It had previously said it could not rule out a link to organised crime in relation to the house fire and the crash.
Turley said the police force had been "at pains to say we shouldn't think that these are all connected, and we shouldn't be jumping to conclusions".
The BBC understands the King has written to the families of two officers killed in the crash to express his deepest sympathies for their loss.
Meanwhile Middlesbrough FC said it would ask supporters to pay their respects to the officers before Saturday's fixture against West Bromwich Albion.
"We are also showing our appreciation for the dedication and hard work of both men, and to Cleveland police force in protecting and supporting our local community," the club said in a statement.
Seven people, including PC Matthew Blades and PC Tom Clough, died in the crash near Middlesbrough on Saturday. Two people were arrested on suspicion of murder following the house fire in Grangetown on Wednesday.
With regards to Thursday night's disorder, Labour Home Office minister Turley said it "put lives at risk" and left residents "frightened and angry in their own communities".
She added: "People have a right to grieve and to pay their respects - but people also have a right to feel safe in their own homes and neighbourhoods."
'Fear and lawlessness'
Durham Police said officers decided to let the cars burn because "the field was contained and it was assessed there was no immediate risk to wider public safety".
County Durham and Darlington Fire and Rescue Service said one crew arrived at the scene but withdrew "given the circumstances and concerns for the safety of our firefighters".
Police said a majority of the crowd in the privately-owned field near Haswell had travelled from outside the County Durham area, bringing with them a number of vehicles.
The force said officers were called to the area shortly after 17:30 BST, adding that no-one was injured and no arrests were made.
A spokesperson for the fire service said: "Following a dynamic risk assessment, it was established that there was no immediate threat to public safety and no significant risk of the fire spreading.
"Given the circumstances and concerns for the safety of our firefighters, the decision was taken to withdraw from the area."
Durham Police added a police operation, including investigation work and visible uniformed patrols, would continue in the area over the coming days.
Turley called on Redcar and Cleveland Borough Council and Cleveland Police to use "every appropriate power to protect our communities".
"Seeing illegal bikes and quad bikes rampaging, and fires and fireworks being set off only heightens people's sense of fear and lawlessness," she said.
"While I understand people are grieving and upset, we cannot allow illegal activity to be excused and unchecked."
Cleveland Police Federation chair Lauren Somerville told BBC Radio Tees earlier it had been "more intense than ever in amongst pain and grief", as an extra 200 police officers are being sent to support the investigation.
"It's been unimaginable... those feelings are going to continue for days, weeks, months and years," she said.
Somerville said the extra officers would be used "wherever is needed".
"It's a testament to Tom and Matthew's memory that the whole country is behind us," she said.
"It's a real sense of people starting to understand what the sacrifice of policing is."
On Saturday, PC Blades and PC Clough died when a Volkswagen Passat, which was going the wrong way on the A66 at South Bank, hit their vehicle.
The five young men in the Volkswagen also died and inquests into all seven deaths opened on Thursday.
Police said 17 people, aged between 16 and 61, had been arrested across Teesside as part of an investigation into the lead-up to the crash.
They have been held on a range of offences including possession of a firearm and being part of an organised crime group.
On Wednesday, Natalie McDonald, 34, died along with her seven-year-old niece Valentina Foster in the fire in Grangetown.
Natalie's mother, Lisa Kirton, described her as "a beautiful soul, who would have done anything for anybody".
Valentina, who was known as Tina, was staying at the house for the summer holidays and had been "dancing around the living room" only the previous night.
A fundraiser for the two police officers set up by the Cleveland Police Federation topped £1m earlier this week.
Somerville said: "It's felt really difficult and to see that many people supporting us and speaking about us and wrapping their arms around Cleveland - it's helping us through."
Leader of Redcar and Cleveland Council Alec Brown said people were frightened and the council's "fundamental" priority was for them to feel safe in their homes.
He said the area had been "inundated" with national press.
"Every incident that happens is getting in the media and on social media and that heightens awareness of everything that's going on and feeds into people not feeling safe in their homes," he added.