- Published
Bluetongue restrictions are to be expanded across the whole of Scotland from Saturday.
Parts of south-west Scotland were already in a restricted zone, after cases in the region began appearing in August. The Scottish government said the decision will make trading more straightforward for farmers, hauliers, and auction markets.
Bluetongue is an insect-borne viral disease that affects sheep and cattle among other animals. It does not affect people or food safety but causes a high rate of death in infected sheep and fertility problems in infected cattle.
The first case in Scotland was reported in early August, in a single sheep on a farm in Dumfries and Galloway.
The decision to expand the zone follows talks with industry representatives, including the National Farmers' Union (NFU) Scotland, the National Sheep Association, and the Scottish Beef Association.
The movement licences currently required to move susceptible livestock into, within, and out of the south-west zone, will no longer be needed after Saturday, due to the whole of Scotland sharing the same disease status.
England and Wales are also in restricted zones, after cases escalated there over the summer.
Jim Fairlie, the Scottish government's minister for agriculture, marine and the islands, said bluetongue is "not going away any time soon" and called the restricted zone covering the whole of Scotland a "practical, sensible step."
The disease has been detected on 40 premises since the south-west Scotland restricted zone was established in early September. The Scottish government said four of those cases were detected outside of the zone by tracing animal movements from the affected farms.
Dumfries and Newton Stewart have the most affected premises, with six in each area.
Call for livestock vaccination
Referring to the autumn trading period, Fairlie said the decision removes "an administrative burden on farmers at what is a critical time in the trading calendar".
"While extending the zone removes the need for movement licences, it does not change our long-term approach to tackling this disease," he said.
"Vaccination remains the single most effective way for farmers to protect their animals from the worst effects of bluetongue, and I would strongly encourage anyone with susceptible livestock to speak to their vet now to discuss the right vaccination approach and to secure supplies ahead of next year's higher-risk season," he added.
A joint Scottish government and industry communications group is being established to promote vaccination and to share advice on the impact of the disease with farmers and veterinary practitioners.
Neil Shand, the chief executive of the Scottish Beef Association, said the decision is "the most logical way forward to prevent trade complications."
Michael Priestley, policy manager with the National Sheep Association, said there was now a "trade-off" between the benefit of eased restrictions and the increased risk of the virus spreading.
He said: "This trade-off is being made because of the faith in the vaccine technology, which to date has offered excellent coverage to livestock in affected areas of the UK."
Symptoms of the disease include nasal discharge, redness and swelling of the lips, nose and muzzle, lameness or reluctance to stand, a decrease in milk production, and diarrhoea in cattle.
Cases must be reported to the UK government's Animal and Plant Health agency, which publishes daily updates.