- Published
For someone who has enjoyed a glittering 21-year career, winning titles across multiple promotions, you would think it would be difficult to pinpoint one standout moment.
For Cris Cyborg however, the decision comes easy.
In 2009, the Brazilian knocked out American Gina Carano to win the Strikeforce featherweight title in a landscape-shifting moment for MMA.
The fight was the first women's title bout to headline a major event and was broadcast live on primetime TV in America.
It was also the first women's MMA bout to feature five, five-minute rounds instead of three, three-minute rounds.
At 41, Cyborg has achieved almost everything you can in MMA, but regards this as the most significant moment of her career - not only because it opened up opportunities for her, but also paved the way for other women to follow in her footsteps.
It is a testament to Cyborg's character that - despite all the challenges and opponents she has overcome - her proudest moment is the fight she won against the glass ceiling.
"I believe a lot of people over the world watched that fight and it opened a lot of doors," Cyborg tells BBC Sport.
"We were training hard saying one day the opportunity is going to come and we're going to be ready to show that girls can fight. And I had the opportunity to show this - not just for me, but to give the opportunity to other women.
"Now I can see how big the sport has grown. It makes me happy because the reality of the dream isn't just for me, it's for all the women in the world. I know the girls before me didn't have this."
Cyborg finished the fight in dramatic style with the referee waving off the contest with one second of the first round remaining as she rained down punches.
The performance was a turning point for Cyborg.
"People were not calling me Cris Cyborg any more, they were calling me 'the killing machine'," she said.
"I think they figured out 'man, that lady from Brazil is dangerous'. A lot of people thought Gina was going to win that fight, they didn't know who I am, and it showed I'm here and going to stay for a long time."
Cyborg's prediction was right.
In the 17 years which have followed, Cyborg has won 21 of her 22 fights and secured further world titles in promotions such as the UFC, Bellator and PFL.
On Saturday in Tampa, Florida, Cyborg will defend her PFL featherweight title against fellow Brazilian Ketlen Vieira in what could be the final bout of her storied career.
It is the final match-up on her PFL contract and the last in a series of contests that Cyborg has dubbed her "legacy tour" - and she has been tight-lipped on what she plans to do next.
'I still dream of becoming a vet'
Cyborg doesn't have to think for long as she recounts other standout moments in her career.
She points to her victorious UFC debut in 2016 against Lina Lansberg after months of fans urging the promotion to sign her.
Cyborg also looks back fondly on her win over Arlene Blencowe in 2020 to defend her Bellator featherweight belt, and victory over compatriot Larissa Pacheco in 2024.
When Cyborg takes on Vieira she will extend her 14-bout record as the woman who has competed in the most world-title fights in MMA history.
She will also be looking to extend her record as the woman with the most knockouts, with 21. Amanda Nunes is second with 13.
To be at the top for so long is rare in MMA and Cyborg credits her longevity to always staying humble.
"When you are champion for a long time you have to be humble because sometimes you think you're a world champion who knows everything," said Cyborg.
"I always step in the cage and gym open to learn. I'm a better fighter today at 41 than 21.
"When I lose I don't feel like I'm going to quit. I say I'm going to train and beat the person next time."
Cyborg has hinted her fight with Vieira will be her final MMA bout without confirming she is set to retire. She has also expressed her interest in focusing more on professional boxing, where she has six victories.
However, Cyborg's next move could take her away from combat sports entirely, given she her interest in training to become a veterinary surgeon.
"This is one dream when I was a young kid, and I love animals, I love to be around animals. I don't just do this because I want to be famous or money," said Cyborg.
"Being a vet is one of the things I love to do because I love animals, I have a passion.
"I have many pets - cows, horses, pigs. I have a dog, a cat, a fish, a bird, I have a lot."