- Published
Some of Wales' most endangered species are "at risk of vanishing" from an area of the country's largest national park, experts have warned.
The National Trust said Nant Ffrancon, a valley in Eryri National Park, was facing "serious ecological decline" with some species in danger of disappearing altogether, including the mountain blackbird and the mountain finch.
Now, a new £1m scheme is aiming to restore and conserve more than 4,000 acres of habitats at Eryri, also known as Snowdonia.
"We're in a very serious situation - we're in a nature emergency. There are so many species in this valley which are on the brink of extinction," said Simon Rogers from the National Trust.
From the high peaks of Cwm Idwal to the deep valleys of Dyffryn Ogwen, Nant Ffrancon is one of the most special and unique landscapes in Wales.
But experts say its habitat has deteriorated and some of Wales' most threatened species, including the ring ouzel bird, are in danger of disappearing altogether.
Now, a project led by the National Trust will work together with local communities, tenant farmers and volunteers to restore and protect 4,040 acres of habitats.
Rogers said there was a "unique variety of habitats" in the area and warned many species "really are on the brink".
"One of the ones we've chosen to look at particularly in this project is the ring ouzel - a bird that's red-listed," he explained.
"It's been in decline massively in the area and across the whole country, and this is one of the last strongholds for it.
"So we'll be looking at that little bird, understanding how they use the landscape here and doing our best to manage the land to ensure their survival for the future.
"There are a lot arctic alpine flowers that grow in Cwm Idwal as well, one of them being the Tufted Saxifrage, where there were only seven individuals at the start of the year - all of them growing here in Cwm Idwal.
"But with the drought we've had this year, only three have made it through the summer. That's three through the whole of Wales, so they're at a very real risk of extinction if we don't do something about it."
Another project which will benefit is Tlysau Mynydd Eryri (Mountain Jewels of Eryri), part of a conservation partnership led by Plantlife Cymru to protect the future of some of the rarest alpine plants in Wales.
Ecological surveys and regular monitoring will map the impact of the restoration work, using species such as the woodcock and otter, and plants including aspen and juniper to give an idea of the health of the valley.
The work will also build on innovative use of GPS livestock collars to manage grazing more precisely.
Cwm Idwal Partnership Officer Rhys Wheldon-Roberts said monitoring was "really important because it allows us to graze in the right areas at the right densities and at the right time".
He added: "The collars on the cattle allow us to move the cattle around the landscape and you can monitor it as you go, and the farmers can see that data live on their apps.
"It can make grazing something much more effective for the cattle and for nature."
As well as local farmers, there will be an emphasis on community involvement and volunteering as part of the work.
"There are opportunities for people to get involved in monitoring, in volunteering, just learning about the landscape in general," said Wheldon-Roberts.
"Here in Cwm Idwal we have lots of school visits every year and they'll be able to see the effects of the project and the effect that the cattle are having in that conservation grazing way, so it's really exciting in that regard as well.
"By bringing people along with us they get a chance to learn and hopefully appreciate, and ultimately try to protect this special landscape that we've got around us."
The project is being funded by nearly £1m from the Nature Networks Fund, external, delivered by the Heritage Fund on behalf of the Welsh government and in partnership with Natural Resources Wales.
"What we're trying to do with this project is set a foundation for the future," said Rogers.
"Some things will change in the next three years, but what we're doing is setting ourselves up so that recovery can continue for decades afterwards."