- Published
Manchester City manager Enzo Maresca says it is "quite poor" that the controversy surrounding Erling Haaland's winner has overshadowed his side's performance at Manchester United on Sunday.
Haaland's goal on the hour mark, which was awarded after the virtual assistant referee ruled in City's favour, secured a 1-0 Premier League victory despite the visitors playing the majority of the derby at Old Trafford with 10 men following Phil Foden's red card.
The VAR decision was subsequently ruled to be incorrect by the referees' body and the aftermath of City's fourth successive league win has been dominated by the fall out from the incident.
"Talking about one episode or one moment after that game when we played for 70- 75 minutes with 10 players, I think it's quite poor," Maresca said, speaking before Thursday's Carabao Cup third-round tie against Norwich City.
"I think the performance was unbelievable, and I'm pleased with the performance."
Haaland's goal was initially disallowed on the field for offside but the VAR review found the striker was just onside, and the goal was awarded.
However, it soon became apparent that the officials had made an error in failing to identify an offside offence by Enzo Fernandez, diving at the ball in a central position and interfering with opponents.
"There is knowledge that there was a mistake and that's all. Sometimes it goes for you, sometimes against you. It's football," the Italian said.
Maresca, who succeeded Pep Guardiola in the summer, said previous VAR decisions have gone against City, including in a 2-1 defeat by United in January 2023.
"Three years ago when I was here [as Guardiola's assistant], it happened the exact same against United," he said.
"The goal was not a regular goal and no one apologised. We are still waiting for the apology for that."
Premier League refereeing body Pro Ref's chief Howard Webb has admitted the VAR did not consider whether Fernandez was offside before Haaland turned home the winner.
"I was really disappointed with this outcome. We all are," said Webb, speaking on 'Match Officials Mic'd Up'.
"None more so than the officials themselves. They take a lot of personal pride in what they do and they're obviously hurting now, having fallen short in this situation."
Foden was sent off for kicking out at Bruno Fernandes in the 23rd minute and United hit the post either side of half-time before the Norwegian's controversial goal on Sunday.
"The VAR gets super-focused on Haaland," said Webb. "He establishes he's onside, he thinks that's a good goal.
"He doesn't truly evaluate the full impact of Fernandez's position. He has a look to see if he touches the ball, because then that relates to potentially knocking it to Haaland, who goes on to score."
City host Norwich on Thursday (19:30 BST) before returning to league action against Sunderland on Sunday, 20 September (14:00).