- Published
A British man jailed in Iran after being accused of spying has had two years added to his decade-long sentence, according to family members.
Craig Foreman was arrested with his wife, Lindsay, in January last year while passing through Iran on a motorcycle journey from Europe to Australia. Both adamantly deny espionage.
In February they were each sentenced to 10 years in jail, but relatives of Craig Foreman said he had been told his punishment is being extended for talking to the media from his cell in Tehran's Evin prison.
The Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office (FCDO) said the department was "urgently following up with the Iranian authorities about the reported increased sentence".
"We understand he was told he was being taken to see his lawyer but was instead brought before a judge and informed of the additional sentence," said Joe Bennett, Lindsay Foreman's son and a spokesperson for the family.
Bennett, of Folkestone, Kent, added that, despite requests, his step-father "was allowed no lawyer, no translator and no opportunity to defend himself".
"We didn't think we could be any more shocked at their appalling treatment, but in this case we are absolutely flabbergasted," he added.
Craig and Lindsay Foreman, from East Sussex, have both been on hunger strike since May, when prison authorities prevented them from calling their families.
The family, who are growing increasingly concerned for their health, are now appealing to the Iranian authorities to show mercy, and set them free.
Last week, a US-based human rights group, HRANA, said it had received information that Craig Foreman had lost about 16kg (35lb) and Lindsay Foreman was suffering from dizziness and body tremors.
Their family now says that a letter written to them asking them to end their hunger strike had not been delivered, nor had medication and other basic supplies.
"My mum and Craig are 18 months into an ordeal they should never have known," said Bennett.
"They are weak, they are hungry, and now Craig is being punished simply for being heard. To add two more years to an innocent man's sentence, in secret and with no chance to defend himself, is a flagrant abuse of the most basic rights any person is owed."
Last month, two United Nations human rights experts called on Iran to release the couple, saying that proceedings against them had been marked by grave irregularities.
"Lindsay and Craig Foreman should not be in prison," said UN special rapporteurs Dr Alice Edwards and Mai Sato.
"They appear to have been wrongfully detained, prosecuted on highly questionable grounds, and sentenced after proceedings that failed to meet basic fair trial guarantees."
'Totally unjustified'
The Foreign Office has advised against all travel to Iran since 2022, saying that people can be detained there simply for having a British passport or connections to the UK.
It has previously said it is working to ensure the Foremans are returned safely to the UK, and stressed the couple's health and welfare was its "priority".
The government described the couple's 10-year sentences as "completely appalling and totally unjustifiable".
It says officials continue to provide consular support to the couple, and have told Iran that, if true, the increase to Mr Foreman's sentence is unacceptable.
The couple's family have welcomed the appointment on Monday of the UK's first ever envoy to support British nationals detained abroad in complex cases where there are concerns about welfare, due process or human rights.
The role will be held by the former Conservative MP and Middle East minister Alistair Burt.
Lindsay and Craig Foreman's family said they look forward to meeting him and hope his appointment will have a positive impact on their case.