- Published
Laptops, phones and bikes are top of the shopping list for thieves as students head off to university, according to insurer Aviva.
They are the items most likely to be on student insurance claims - after being stolen from digs, cars, public transport and bars and restaurants.
But there are ways you can help keep them safe, and things to consider if you are planning to get insurance cover.
Get it wrong and it can be expensive, or possibly illegal.
How to keep your stuff safe
The majority of student insurance claims are the result of theft, ahead of accidental damage, according to Aviva. The insurer declined to say what proportion of claims resulted in payouts.
"Laptops, computers and mobile phones play a vital role in student life, but they can also be attractive targets for opportunistic thieves due to their value and portability," said Steven Jackson, its home product manager.
His advice includes:
- Leaving really expensive and sentimental belongings back at home
- Locking up valuables and keeping them out of sight when you're out
- Staying vigilant - do you really need to leave your bag or laptop to reserve a café table or a spot in the library?
It is entirely the choice of an individual as to whether it is worth insuring belongings while off at university or college.
Car insurance is compulsory, says the Association of British Insurers (ABI), but you can choose whether it's worth insuring your bike or other items.
How to make sure you've got the correct cover
First, the ABI suggests checking if you are covered already. Some student halls might already include insurance, or your parents' policy might extend to you.
If not, there is the option of buying contents insurance.
"This type of policy covers the cost of replacing or repairing your possessions if they are damaged, destroyed or stolen - giving you peace of mind that you're protected should something go wrong," the ABI said.
You must check how much you're covered for and whether it's enough to replace everything, including the maximum value of a claim on a single item.
You can do this by creating an inventory of all of your contents, including clothes, electronics and furniture, and adding up the cost of replacing each item.
You might need to pay extra to cover a nice bike, or to cover items that you take out and about with you rather than leave in your accommodation.
And, if you're driving, make sure your insurer knows the car is kept somewhere new.
If it is your parents' car and you are now the main driver, you have to inform the insurer. It's illegal if you don't.