- Published
AI has increasingly become part of everyday life over the past decade.
The technology takes many forms - from personalising social media feeds to spotting friends in smartphone photos - and accelerating medical breakthroughs.
But the rise of chatbots like OpenAI's ChatGPT has prompted concern about the tech's environmental impact, ethical implications and data use.
Recent claims that AI could become too powerful and threaten humanity have also triggered calls for slower development and tighter regulation.
What is AI and what is it used for?
AI allows computers to process large amounts of data, identify patterns and follow detailed instructions about what to do with that information.
Computers cannot think, empathise or reason.
However, scientists have developed systems that can perform tasks which usually require human intelligence, trying to replicate how people acquire and use knowledge.
This could be trying to anticipate what product an online shopper might buy, based on previous purchases, in order to recommend items.
The technology is also behind voice-controlled virtual assistants like Apple's Siri and Amazon's Alexa, and is being used to develop systems for self-driving cars.
AI also helps social platforms like Facebook, TikTok and X decide what posts to show users. Streaming services Spotify and Deezer use AI to suggest music.
There are also a number of applications in medicine, as scientists use AI to help spot cancers, review X-ray results, speed up diagnoses and identify new treatments.
What is generative AI, and how do apps like ChatGPT and Meta AI work?
Generative AI is used to create new content which can seem like it has been made by a human.
It does this by learning from vast quantities of existing data such as online text and images.
ChatGPT and Chinese rival DeepSeek's chatbot are popular generative AI tools that can be used to produce text, images, code and more material.
Google's Gemini or Meta AI can similarly hold text conversations with users.
Apps like Midjourney or Veo 3 are dedicated to creating images or video from simple text prompts.
Generative AI can also be used to make high-quality music.
Songs mimicking the style or sound of famous musicians have gone viral, sometimes leaving fans confused about their authenticity.
Why is AI controversial?
While acknowledging AI's potential, some experts are worried about the implications of its rapid growth.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) suggested that AI could affect nearly 40% of jobs, and worsen global financial inequality.
Prof Geoffrey Hinton, a computer scientist regarded as a "godfather" of AI development, warned powerful AI systems could even make humans extinct - although his fear was dismissed by his fellow "AI godfather", Yann LeCun.
In September 2026 similar fears were raised again after some AI researchers warned the tech could threaten humanity in the near future.
But experts have urged a focus on present risks and AI dangers - such as its potential to reproduce biased information, or discriminate against some social groups.
This is because public data used to train many AI systems can reflect existing societal biases such as sexism or racism.
And while AI tools are growing more adept, they are still prone to errors.
Generative AI systems are known for their ability to "hallucinate" and assert falsehoods as fact, even sometimes invent sources for inaccurate information.
In early 2025 Apple pulled an AI feature after it summarised news app notifications incorrectly, and Google also faced criticism for inaccuracies produced by its AI search overviews.
There are concerns about AI use in schools and workplaces, with students using AI tools to "cheat" on assignments, being wrongly accused of using it and employees "smuggling" it into work.
But writers, musicians and artists have also pushed back against the tech on ethical grounds.
Many have issued statements or signed open letters accusing AI developers of using their work to train systems without consent or compensation.
Thousands of creators - including Abba singer-songwriter Björn Ulvaeus, writers Ian Rankin and Joanne Harris, and actress Julianne Moore - signed a statement, external in October 2024 calling AI a "major, unjust threat" to their livelihoods.
How does AI effect the environment?
It is not clear how much energy AI systems use, but some researchers estimate the industry as a whole could soon consume as much as the Netherlands.
Creating the powerful computer chips needed to run AI programmes requires lots of power and water.
Demand for generative AI services has also meant an increase in the number of data centres which power them.
These huge halls - housing thousands of racks of computer servers - often use substantial amounts of energy or require large volumes of water to keep them cool.
Some large tech companies have invested in ways to reduce or reuse the water needed, or have opted for alternative methods such as air-cooling.
However, some experts and activists fear that AI will worsen water supply problems.
The BBC was told in February that government plans to make the UK a "world leader" in AI could put already stretched supplies of drinking water under strain.
In September 2024, Google said it would reconsider proposals for a data centre in Chile, which has struggled with drought.
Are there laws governing AI?
Some governments have already introduced rules governing how AI operates.
The EU's Artificial Intelligence Act places controls on high risk systems used in areas such as education, healthcare, law enforcement or elections. It bans some AI use altogether.
Generative AI developers in China are required to safeguard citizens' data, and promote transparency and accuracy of information. But they are also bound by the country's strict censorship laws.
Many countries, including the UK, have sought to regulate AI through existing laws rather than legislate - amid concern it could quickly date as AI develops.
The UK has amended laws to target specific AI dangers, such as banning tools that can create deepfake nude imagery or create child sexual abuse material.
It has also established an independent AI Security Institute to identify risks and evaluate advanced AI models, and signed agreements with the US to collaborate on "robust" AI testing methods.
But in early 2025, neither country signed a global AI declaration pledging an open, inclusive and sustainable approach to the technology.