- Published
Meteorological summer is over, schools are back and so is the UK's unsettled weather.
After a heat spike on Sunday, low pressure systems will continue to bring wet and windy conditions, especially to the north of the UK at the beginning of the week, before things settle down on Wednesday and Thursday.
It will also feel cooler for many places across England and Wales, after Sunday's temperature approached 29C (84F) in south-east England.
Despite a mostly dry weekend for many, last week was the wettest week in England since early February, according to the Environment Agency.
Spain recorded 45.7C in Huelva last week, which was the country's highest temperature of the year so far.
Cooling down
Pressure is falling on Monday, the wind direction is changing and a weather front is moving down from the north-west, signalling a change to cooler and fresher weather.
The weather front, which is mainly a band of cloud with a few showers, will sweep across England and Wales. Sunny spells will follow. Temperatures will peak at 25C in south-east England.
Cooler and less humid air follows the band of cloud.
Another band of heavier rain will develop in Northern Ireland on Monday morning then spread across to Scotland and Cumbria in the afternoon.
Accompanied by strong and gusty southwesterly winds, the rain will limit temperatures to around 17C in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Gales for northern UK
A deep area of low pressure will still be situated to the north-west of Scotland on Tuesday.
Northern parts of the UK will be particularly windy with gusts of 50-60mph possible in northern and western Scotland. These areas are used to strong winds at this time of year but if the windy conditions funnel through the central lowlands there could be some disruption.
The windy weather in the north will be accompanied by frequent showers.
Further south, across England and Wales, a spell of rain from overnight will linger in the southeast during Tuesday morning before clearing away.
The rain here will not be that heavy and much of England and the whole of Wales are still in drought.
More settled picture midweek
The area of low pressure will move into the North Sea on Wednesday and it will be windy along the east coast for a while.
Otherwise, rising pressure will leave a dry midweek for most of us with some sunshine and lighter winds.
Showers are expected to return to western parts of the UK on Thursday but these will die out on Friday as they move into eastern areas.
Temperatures from midweek will be near the seasonal average with the highest temperatures in the south-east of 22C.
You can check the latest details for the weather for the week ahead here.