- Published
The body of a newborn baby has been found along a shoreline in north Wales.
North Wales Police has appealed for the mother who may be "extremely vulnerable" to come forward.
A member of the public found the body on the Menai Strait shoreline near Siliwen Road, in Bangor, on Sunday shortly before 17:00 BST.
During a press conference, director of midwifery and women's services for Betsi Cadwaladr University Health Board Fiona Giraud has appealed directly to the mother to come forward.
"I want you to know that our immediate concern is for your health, safety and wellbeing. We recognise that you may be feeling frightened, overwhelmed or unsure about what to do next," she said.
The force has not revealed any information about the baby's gender or age.
Giraud said they "have real concerns for the health of the mother".
"We recognise that she is likely to be extremely vulnerable. She may be fearful of seeking the support she needs through fear of identifying herself.
"You may feel you have nowhere to turn, or that you cannot speak to anyone about what has happened. Please do not feel that you have to face this alone.
"We don't yet know all the circumstances surrounding your baby's death but what is important right now is that we find you, make sure you are safe, and ensure you receive any medical attention and support you may need.
"I am asking you personally, to please get in touch with us. You can speak to a healthcare professional, approach a police officer or attend a police station.
"If you are watching or listening to this appeal, please know that we want to hear from you. Please take the first step and contact us. There are people to help you."
Det Sgt Kelly Wynne said they were concerned the mother "may not be in a position to reach out for support", and appealed to the baby's father and the mother's family, friends, neighbours or colleagues who may have information.
"If you have any information regarding a woman or girl you think may have been pregnant or whose behaviour has been unusual or out of character over the past few months including withdrawing from friends, family or social ties, please contact us.
"We appreciate coming forward is difficult, but inaction is not an option."
A post-mortem examination is due to take place on Wednesday afternoon.
The force said people living in Bangor may see an increased police presence over the next few days while the investigation continues.
It urged anyone with information to contact them on 101, quoting Operation Melex.
It added a Major Incident Public Portal, external (MIPP) had been created where anyone with information that could help the forces enquiries can directly contact police.