- Published
Mixed martial arts fighter Allan Nascimento has died at the age of 34, says the UFC.
According to MMA's leading promotion, the Brazilian flyweight was found unresponsive on Monday morning after suffering an apparent heart attack in his sleep.
"Despite the efforts of the responding medical team, he was pronounced deceased at the scene," added a UFC statement., external
"Our thoughts and deepest condolences are with Allan's family, friends, team-mates and loved ones during this incredibly difficult time."
Nascimento had been with the UFC since 2021 and his last fight was a split-decision loss to Mitch Raposo in June.
That left Nascimento with an overall MMA record of 22 wins and seven losses, with a 4-2 record in the UFC.
Nascimento trained at Chute Boxe under coach Diego Lima in Brazil, and was a training partner to former UFC champion Charles Oliveira, UFC lightweight Elves Brener and more.
A 'warrior' and 'extraordinary human being'
Oliveira posted a tribute to his friend on social media.
"Today I lost a brother that the fight game gave me," he said on Instagram.
"Thank you for always being by my side, for sharing the mats and the corner.
"I have nothing but gratitude for having you with me in training, in the corner, and just hanging out. I love you, man; you're a legend."
Brener also posted a message.
"Thank you for the wonderful journey, brother," he said.
"You were always an incredible person, and today is an extremely sad day for all of us at Chute Boxe.
"I will carry you in my heart forever, champion."
Chute Boxe said on their social media their team had lost a "warrior, friend, dedicated competitor and extraordinary human being".
"[He] earned the respect and admiration of all who had the privilege of knowing him," they said in a statement on Instagram.
"Allan inspired on and off the mats with his determination, humility, respect and fighting spirit.
"Your presence will be missed immeasurable, rest in peace Allan, your name, your story and your legacy will live forever through our star."