- Published
Manchester City manager Enzo Maresca says the club's titles are "absolutely not" tainted after they were found guilty of the majority of the 115 charges brought against them by the Premier League.
Maresca reiterated his faith in the club's owners and belief that they will win their appeal against the verdict during a news conference on Friday dominated by questions on the matter.
The Italian, notably relaxed as he offered his responses, rejected the suggestion City's titles have been tainted by the ruling, as he knows "exactly the effort that the club put in to achieve" them.
An independent commission found Manchester City guilty of all charges relating to breaches of the Premier League's financial regulations between the 2009-10 and 2017-18 seasons.
The club have appealed against the verdict and claimed in a statement the commission's ruling contained "clear material errors, of law, principle and fact and is unsafe".
Preparing to play their first match since that verdict was announced, away to rivals Liverpool on Sunday, Maresca said in an in-house interview on Thursday the "feeling is fantastic" among his players and they are not affected by "the noise" surrounding the club.
He added on Friday: "The reason I joined this club is that I completely trust, 100%, the owner, the CEO, the sporting director, all the organisation. So I don't have doubt about that.
"I spoke with the club for sure. We all trust, and probably the right moment to speak about that is when we are going to win this appeal."
He added: "For me, the players - we can control just the pitch side, the football side. So we are focused on that. This is what we can do and what we can control."
Appointed as Pep Guardiola's successor in June, Maresca is in his third spell at the club following time spent with the academy and as Guardiola's assistant coach - including during the Treble-winning 2022-23 campaign.
The 46-year-old has won each of his first five Premier League games in charge of City, and could become the fourth manager to win his first six of a spell in charge of a club in the competition at Liverpool on Sunday.
The announcement of the verdict reached by an independent panel, which found City guilty of 'sham' contracts and misleading accounts as part of a scheme to disguise secret funding of more than £830m, means Maresca's side will expect to receive an even more hostile reception than usual at Anfield.
Asked if he had any concerns over the atmosphere during the match, Maresca said: "It will be a tough game, for sure. We need to be ready, the focus needs to be about the game, but we know the environment at Anfield.
"It probably will be worse because of the situation but, again, it will be our duty to do our best and try to win the game.
"The reason I decide to become manager is for this type of game."
Maresca thanked one journalist who asked a question not related to the verdict, confirming talisman Erling Haaland is "ready" to play against Liverpool after recovering from his efforts for Norway during the international break in Marbella.
Maresca would not confirm whether he has read the independent commission's findings.
The former Leicester City and Chelsea boss said the charges against the club were not discussed during his conversations about taking the job in the summer.
And he insisted he would "100%" have still accepted the role had the findings been published before an agreement was reached.
"We didn't speak about that because I don't think it was a problem for the club at the time and I think they are are thinking in an honest way," Maresca said.
"I think they are convinced that in the end we are going to win the appeal."
Earlier on Friday, Bayern Munich manager and former Manchester City captain Vincent Kompany said: "I played 11 years for the club and I've loved all the years I've played for the club. Everything we've achieved and done on the pitch I'm really proud of.
"Everything else, as a player you're not a part of that. Right now, as a coach of Bayern Munich, I'm not too occupied with that topic."
'Uncertainty not good for anyone' - Premier League bosses have their say
Arsenal boss Mikel Arteta, who spent time as assistant to Guardiola at Manchester City prior to taking charge of the Gunners, said he will "respect the process" of the appeal.
"I think the timelines, it is still an ongoing process that is not resolved because it has been appealed," he added.
"My position and the club's position is not to make any further comment until it is resolved.
"It is a lot of noise around it and it is an ongoing process that is not resolved yet. I think we need to respect it.
"There is nothing in our hands and the only thing we can do is focus on everything that we can do. That is where we put the energy."
Liverpool boss Andoni Iraola and Chelsea's Xabi Alonso both stressed the need for patience following City's appeal.
"I think uncertainty is not good for anyone and anyone involved, but the process is ongoing and we have to be patient like everyone else and see what happens at the end," Iraola said.
Alonso added: "We need to wait for the final sanctions from the panel. I think they are independent enough to assess all the situations.
"We have to be patient for sure. It is out of our hands, we have to respect the independence of the panel and see what happens."
Everton were deducted 10 points in November 2023 - in a punishment later reduced to six on appeal - and then docked two points in April 2024 in separate cases for breaches of profit and sustainability rules (PSR).
"I wasn't here when it was difficult for Everton, when things were bad," said Toffees boss David Moyes.
"Looking at it now from where I am sitting, it looks terrible that we have been docked points and pay some fines and not that long ago.
"There's other things that have been going on - nearly 10 years ago - that have not been dealt with. I find that really difficult.
"I hope it's not just Everton who are getting picked on here."
Nottingham Forest were another club punished previously for breaching PSR rules, with the City Ground side docked four points in March 2024.
"There is no final verdict right now. That's why I don't see any point to comment on Man City because I can't," said Forest boss Oliver Glasner.
"But let's say in general, if somebody cheats he needs to get punished. If not, then not. And of course, we all hope for the integrity of the game, for the integrity of the Premier League, that the final word is spoken soon.
"But we also know, I think there are thousands of pages to read. I read a book every night, and it takes quite long to read thousands of pages and also then find the final verdict, so it takes a little bit of time. We have to be patient, but yes, it should be soon."
CORRECTION: Quotes that originally appeared in this article were wrongly attributed to Mikel Arteta rather than Enzo Maresca.