- Published
Sir Keir Starmer has said the UK's "unwavering" support for Ukraine will continue, on a final visit to the country as prime minister.
He met Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky to announce fresh funding worth £255m (300m Euro), including 16 new advanced aircraft, for Ukraine's fight against Russia.
Speaking in the Ukrainian capital Kyiv, he said: "Anyone who thinks that Ukraine is somehow a drain is just plain wrong - The truth is Ukraine's stand has preserved European security."
Sir Keir's visit, where he was awarded Ukranian honour the Order of Freedom, comes amid protests in several Ukrainian cities over Zelensky's surprise dismissal of popular Defence Minister Mykhailo Fedorov.
Zelensky has not yet explained his decision to get rid of 35-year-old Fedorov, who was appointed in January and credited with heading a drive against corruption.
Ukrainian MPs are expected to vote in Ihor Klymenko, who currently heads the interior ministry, as Fedorov's replacement on Thursday.
Today's visit comes on Sir Keir's final day as leader of the Labour Party, with Andy Burnham set to replace him on Friday before becoming prime minister on Monday.
Asked whether Burnham would continue the UK's steadfast support for Ukraine, Sir Keir said: "The fact that there'll be a new prime minister in days to come doesn't change that dynamic at all.
"The resolve of the UK will remain the same - We will not waver."
Sir Keir leaves a legacy including the signing of a 100-year partnership between the two countries, aimed at fostering closer defence and trade ties, and has led efforts to establish a future peacekeeping force.
Standing alongside Zelensky, he said Ukraine would always be at the forefront of his mind even though his time as prime minister was ending.
Support for Ukraine's cause was "in our bones", he said, highlighting how Ukrainian flags are still flying above Downing Street, churches and town halls across the UK, even five years into the conflict.
"Your fight is our fight, your security is our security, and the UK will not waver," Sir Keir assured Zelensky.
"The shift in momentum is real and Ukraine is now in its strongest position since the start of Russia's full stage invasion.
"Bravery takes you through unimaginable hardships but finally - I am certain - it will reward you with victory."
Asked if he was concerned about changes of leadership in Britain, and in France next year, Zelensky said: "Of course I'm afraid of changes, of course we are afraid because we are in the war each day.
"But again the priority is the relation between nations, not just between just people. I'm sure that these relations will not change, or we have to do our best not to lose such very good relations."
He added: "I hope we will never lose strong relations with the UK during or after the war." Sir Keir replied: "You won't."
In an interview with Sky News, Sir Keir said he believed Ukraine would win the war against Russia.
"I think that the last six months have been a real turning point because at the beginning of the conflict, everybody assumed that Russia would win within a matter of weeks," Sir Keir said.
He said Ukraine had "begun to push back on the front this year" and showed "it's not just the size of your army, it's how you fight a modern conflict".
Sir Keir also insisted UK support for Ukraine was behind the UK's new drone industry, which he said had grown from almost nothing over the last two years to become world-leading technology.
The UK has given £3bn in military support to Ukraine this year, including a commitment to deliver 150,000 drones and thousands of air defence missiles.
The latest announcement is for a squadron of 16 Swedish-made Gripen fighter jets, capable of air-to-air combat, strikes on ground targets, and reconnaissance missions, is expected to support 5,000 highly-skilled jobs across more than 50 UK-based companies.