- Published
Disgraced funeral boss Robert Bush, who failed to bury or cremate people and gave grieving families the ashes of strangers, has offered those affected a written apology - but some have reacted angrily.
Bush, 48, was jailed for 20 years at Hull Crown Court on Friday.
Some 35 bodies and more than 100 sets of ashes were found by police who raided Legacy Independent Funeral Directors in Hull following a tip-off in March 2024.
Jasmine Beverley, whose son's remains were discovered at the funeral parlour nearly two years after he was stillborn, said: "Reading the letter has left me feeling nothing but anger."
This story contains details some might find distressing.
Robert Bush's letter in full:
To everyone who has been affected by my actions.
"I have spent a great deal of time thinking about the events that [sic] wish to say something directly to you.
"I know that many of you entrusted me and my business with the care of someone you loved during one of the most difficult times in your lives.
"I recognise that what happened has caused distress, upset and uncertainty for many families. I am deeply sorry.
"There are no words that can undo what has happened or take away the pain that many of you have experienced. I understand that this has affected not only your confidence in me, but also memories surrounding the loss of those closest to you.
"I accept responsibility for my failures. Looking back, I know that I should have acted differently and much sooner. I regret that I did not do so.
"I do not expect forgiveness, nor do I write this letter in the hope of reducing the seriousness of what has happened.
"I simply wanted you to know that I genuinely regret the consequences of my actions, and the impact they have had on so many people.
"I appreciate that every family's experience has been different, and I respect that some people may never wish to accept my apology. That is entirely understandable.
"I hope that, in time, each of you can find some peace and remember your loved one for who they were rather than for the circumstances that have followed. I am truly sorry."
The former undertaker admitted 67 offences, including 30 counts of preventing a lawful and decent burial, and theft from 12 charities.
Prosecutors said Bush ran a "shambolic and chaotic" operation at the Hessle Road premises and his "appalling" offending had caused "extreme emotional pain, anguish and upset".
On Wednesday evening, some of his victims reacted angrily to the letter.
Beverley told the court how learning that her baby Sunny Beverley-Conlin was found in a brown paper bag on the floor of the funeral parlour "will stay with me for the rest of my life".
Sunny's remains were recovered from the Hessle Road premises one year and 10 months after he was stillborn on 13 May 2022, the court heard. She was given a set of ashes by Bush the following March.
Beverley said: "Reading the letter has left me feeling nothing but anger.
"It reads as though he is apologising for our reaction and not his actions.
"I don't have the luxury of separating my memories of Sunny from what happened because the memories I do have are tied directly to the mismanagement of the final act of love I tried to give him - his funeral.
"This will haunt me for the rest of my life."
Tristan Essex, whose grandmother, Jessie Stockdale, was one of the 35 bodies found at Legacy, said he was "absolutely disgusted" by the letter.
"It's like he's mocking and tormenting us," he said.
"Clearly, he is not sorry for the actions he chose, he's sorry for the consequences of his evil actions.
"It looks like it's been generated by AI. It doesn't even make sense.
"It's like he's laughing in our face."
Essex said he thought the letter was "all about him [Bush]" and "hardly an apology".
If you have been affected by issues surrounding bereavement, information is available via BBC Action Line, including contact details of organisations that can help.
Listen to highlights from Hull and East Yorkshire on BBC Sounds, watch the latest episode of Look North.