- Published
A police chief has apologised after admitting phones were twice seized from the Manchester synagogue attacker months before the car and knife assault but they were not examined.
Jihad Al-Shamie, 35, was on bail for an alleged rape when he carried out the attack on Heaton Park Synagogue in Crumpsall on 2 October 2025, in which two Jewish men were killed.
His devices, which contained evidence of his extreme views, were seized after he was arrested in February and September but not analysed.
Greater Manchester Police Chief Constable Sir Stephen Watson said he was "deeply sorry", conceding that "the information contained within these devices would have inspired further investigative action".
Sir Stephen said the end of legal proceedings against Mohammad Bashir, who has been jailed for life with a minimum term of 17 years for plotting a separate attack with Al-Shamie, meant rules around sharing information about a live criminal case had been lifted.
He said: "In conducting an internal review, it became apparent that GMP had seized Al-Shamie's mobile devices, at the point of each arrest.
"The significance of the data contents of these devices was substantial in respect of evidencing an extremist mindset.
"I am disappointed at the prospect of adding to the distress of all of those affected by the terrible events last October.
"For this, I am deeply sorry."
The apology came after Bashir's sentencing over the plot with Al-Shamie to attack the UK's Defence Academy in Shrivenham.
Details emerged in the case at Manchester Crown Court that the pair had been discussing their extremist views in WhatsApp chats, including preparing for a "war".
The court was played footage showing the moment Al-Shamie and Bashir discussed becoming martyrs.
Meanwhile, the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) confirmed it was investigating "all previous contact between Greater Manchester Police and Jihad Al-Shamie prior to the terror attack on 2 October 2025".
A spokesperson for the police watchdog said this included the actions taken by police in response to reports of crimes committed by him.
One officer is under investigation by the IOPC for potential misconduct in relation to their handling of allegations of rape and other sexual offences against Al-Shamie.
"This does not necessarily mean that disciplinary proceedings will follow. This decision will be made on conclusion of the investigation," the spokesperson said.
Melvin Cravitz and Adrian Daulby were killed after Al-Shamie, from Prestwich, drove his Kia Picanto into the gates of the synagogue and began attacking people with a knife.
Worshippers had gathered to mark Yom Kippur, the holiest day of the year for Jews.
Al Shamie, who was wearing a fake suicide belt, was killed by police gunfire at the scene.
The IOPC said its investigation would consider whether GMP missed any opportunities to prevent the attack.
The watchdog said it was made aware of the information recovered from Al-Shamie's devices by GMP last week, and would review it as part of the investigation.
Sir Stephen said Al-Shamie had been arrested on 13 February 2025 on suspicion of breaching a non-molestation order; and on the 21 September 2025 on suspicion of rape.
"Regrettably, I can confirm that the significance of the information stored on Al-Shamie's devices was not realised as they had not been examined before the attack took place on the 2 October 2025," he said.
Sir Stephen said there was "little doubt" the extremist messages on the attackers phones would have led to further investigation, but the devices were not reviewed.
The inquests into the deaths of Cravitz and Daulby in the synagogue attack are set to take place in spring 2027.
The proposed scope of the inquests will include examining the radicalisation of Al-Shamie and whether the attack could have been prevented.
Sir Stephen said those inquests would examine "all aspects of the attack".
The chief constable added that it was for the IOPC and the coroner to determine the "impact" of police not reviewing the contents of Al-Shamie's devices before the attack took place.
Listen to the best of BBC Radio Manchester on Sounds and follow BBC Manchester on Facebook, external, X, external, and Instagram, external. You can also send story ideas via Whatsapp to 0808 100 2230.