- Published
US Secretary of State Marco Rubio has said the suspected terror plot at RAF Fairford "clearly involves the hands of a foreign actor".
In an interview with Fox News on Monday, Rubio said "I think it ties us to the reality here, and that is we are dealing with elements in the world, and in the case of Iran, for example, who have openly threatened to attack American interests globally".
He did not provide evidence or further details. Tehran has strongly denied any involvement.
A major incident was declared at the weekend after "suspicious vehicles" were seen near the RAF base in Gloucestershire, which has been used by US forces to carry out strikes against Iran.
Dozens of homes were evacuated after the three vehicles were reported to police in the early hours of Sunday morning.
Five men, who are all UK nationals in their 20s, were arrested on suspicion of terror offences, and later released on bail.
On Monday Assistant Commissioner Laurence Taylor, head of Counter Terrorism Policing (CTP), said officers are considering all angles, including that "this may be activity committed by proxies, or individuals either knowingly or unknowingly, working on behalf of a foreign state".
In his comments to Fox News, Rubio said: "What could have happened in the UK over the weekend is a very serious situation." He added: "There's a lot more news that'll come out on this in the days to come, but there's only so much I can say right now at this point about it."
The Iranian embassy in London said it "categorically rejects and strongly condemns" what it called "unfounded and malicious speculations" linking Iran to the incident.
The RAF base has been used as a forward operating location by the US Air Force (USAF) for decades.
In recent months, US bombers have taken off from the base for the Middle East, after the UK approved a US request to use it for what the government calls defensive strikes on Iran.
In July, Iran said "any base used for aggression against Iranian territory constitutes a legitimate target for our forces".
According to CTP, the five men - aged between 23 and 25 and from London - remain under investigation, and their release is "subject to stringent conditions on their movement and contact with others".
Speaking at the White House earlier on Monday, Donald Trump said "I will tell you, I would have said 'Don't let them have bail'. I'm surprised that they released them. I wouldn't have done that."
Prime Minister Andy Burnham meanwhile chaired a Cobra meeting on Monday and urged people "not to speculate while the authorities establish the full facts".
On Tuesday a heavily guarded police cordon remained in place around the RAF base at Fairford.
Residents of the nearby village of Whelford have been told they can move home. One local told the BBC most people had returned home, but had been told by police to stay inside and not take any photos.
"I haven't gone home as I want to wait until I know more about what the hell happened, as it feels super dodge to me," she said.
Local councillor Tristan Wilkinson said the mood among residents is a mixture of "confusion" and "weariness".
"I don't think there's going to be anything normal about Whelford for quite a considerable amount of time," he told BBC local radio.
In the village of Fairford meanwhile, butcher Andrew Butler said "people are worried, a bit panicky".
"Any suspicious vehicle that people aren't sure about, they think could potentially be a problem," he said.