- Published
Conor Benn returns to welterweight for the first time since April 2022 to challenge WBC champion Ryan Garcia in Las Vegas.
The 29-year-old Briton is bidding for the crowning moment of his 10-year professional career at T-Mobile Arena.
Benn has won 25 of his 26 fights as a professional and would emulate his father, Nigel, by claiming a WBC title with another victory.
Garcia, 28, is making the first defence of his belt after beating Mario Barrios by decision in February.
The American has picked up 25 victories in his 28-fight career, earning 20 of those wins by knockout, while losing two, with one no-contest.
Live text commentary will begin on Sunday, 13 September at 03:00 BST on the BBC Sport website and app.
BBC Sport spoke to figures from the boxing world to get their predictions for the bout.
Tony Bellew - former cruiserweight world champion
"This is a really good fight and it's not as one-sided as everyone thinks. I believe Conor Benn's heart is going to come into question and he's going to have to climb off the floor a couple of times.
"If Garcia has taken this lightly in any way he will lose, but he's in great shape and is saying the right things in the build-up. But I'm still going for a Conor Benn knockout inside eight rounds."
Prediction - Benn
Carl Frampton - former two-weight world champion
"I thought Benn had a fair chance due to his tenacity and Garcia has quit in fights before. But as the fight is getting closer I think Benn is a big underdog and it's Garcia's fight to lose.
"Benn looked terrible in a catchweight - 3lb above the welterweight limit - last time out against an ageing Regis Prograis, who was injured and had only one good leg, and he couldn't put a dent in him.
"He looks like he's struggled with the weight cut and I don't get a good feeling, so I'll go with a comfortable Garcia win."
Prediction - Garcia
Barry Jones - former super-featherweight world champion
"We know Benn can be tenacious and has power but I don't think he'll be the same fighter he was in the two fights against Chris Eubank Jr. Benn didn't look great in his last fight against Regis Prograis, so you have to give favour to Garcia.
"Garcia has speed, power and patience. Benn will force the pace and I think he walks on to a shot. I'll go with Garcia to get the stoppage inside five rounds."
Prediction - Garcia
Bob Arum - Top Rank promoter
"Benn is going to get knocked out in one or two rounds. You can't take off all this weight at this age - he doesn't even look recognisable."
Prediction - Garcia
Paul Smith - former world title challenger
"It's heavily on what Garcia turns up. If a very good Garcia turns up I can see it being over early."
Prediction - Garcia
Adam Smith - DAZN commentator
"Conor Benn has a problem because it's at welterweight and he's had to grind down to make weight, so how will he deal with the speed, skill and power of Garcia? Benn is tenacious and fierce so I think it will be enticing. But you have to favour champion Garcia on home soil."
Prediction - Garcia
Anthony Crolla - former lightweight world champion
"I can't look past a Ryan Garcia knockout. I think this is a huge step up for Conor - I hope I'm wrong - but you can't compare this fight to his ones with Chris Eubank Jr. This is a gigantic step up in class."
Prediction - Garcia
Josh Taylor - former undisputed light-welterweight champion
"If Ryan had the right mentality and trained properly, the main word being if, I think he stops Conor Benn within six.
"If not, I think Conor gets through the 12 rounds but loses on points by a few rounds."
Prediction - Garcia
Kevin Iole - boxing journalist and boxing Hall of Fame inductee
"I have to pick Garcia because I think Conor is one-dimensional and the speed will be a big factor. Benn is good when the going gets tough, while Ryan is unpredictable - but if both guys are at their best then Ryan wins."
Prediction - Garcia
Ade Oladipo - DAZN presenter
"I think Ryan Garcia gets it done - and early. Conor Benn will come out like a steam train and that could be a problem.
"Garcia has the hand speed and serious experience around the ring - he's been doing this for longer than Benn - which might be a bit too much.
"Garcia to win between rounds four and seven, but it should be a fun fight for five or six rounds."
Prediction - Garcia