- Published
High pressure is set to build across the UK over the next few days bringing drier weather for the weekend.
Heavy downpours have brought rain to parts in need this week - albeit with some flash flooding - but these are set to ease.
Many areas will see sunny spells across Saturday and Sunday with daytime temperatures climbing again, perhaps to above the August average in parts of the south of England.
However the nights will turn rather chilly.
Becoming drier and cooler
Friday will bring the chance of further heavy showers, particularly in England and Wales where a few could still be thundery.
However most parts of Scotland and Northern Ireland will be dry for much of the time.
Northerly winds will be fairly brisk around some coasts, and will make it feel rather cool.
Temperatures are set to peak at 12C in northern Scotland, where it could get up to 21C across southern England, somewhat below the average for August.
If temperatures fail to reach 25C anywhere in the UK - as looks likely - it will be the first time that has happened since 29 June.
Friday night will be a notably chilly night - and may come as a shock to the system.
Temperatures are expected to fall to 3-4C in some rural parts of Scotland and northern England.
Chilly nights will continue to be a feature over the weekend but with more sunshine and lighter winds, daytime temperatures will climb.
By Sunday, afternoon highs will reach 16-20C in Scotland and Northern Ireland, with 19-25C predicted for England and Wales.
These temperatures will be around, or just above, the seasonal norm.
A few scattered light showers are possible in the north and west of the UK but the vast majority will be dry, with a mix of patchy cloud and sunny spells.
Drought continues
The heavy downpours of the last few days brought some localised flash flooding but have not been enough to alleviate the ongoing drought situation.
On Thursday, the National Drought Group announced that it will begin meeting weekly - instead of monthly, as usual - to coordinate the ongoing response.
Over two-thirds of England is in drought - along with all of Wales - and officials say the situation is still intensifying despite this week's rain.
Drought will only be declared as over once reservoirs, rivers and groundwater stocks are replenished. This will only happen after months of sustained, significant rainfall.
The outlook for the next few weeks looks rather mixed with rain set to return next week, but the ongoing chance of further hot spells during September.
There is a lot of uncertainty in the long-range forecast and you can keep up to date with your local prospects on the BBC Weather website and app.