- Published
After weeks of scorching heat and drought, summer's swan song is looking increasingly unsettled, with further heavy downpours and strong winds still on the way for some.
Heavy rain and showers have already affected parts of the UK this weekend, and there's more unsettled weather to come through Sunday and into Bank Holiday Monday, although there will also be some drier and brighter spells.
This could still make for some soggy moments at festivals and outdoor events taking place on Sunday and into Bank Holiday Monday.
Strong winds could also cause some disruption for travellers and holidaymakers, particularly across southern parts of the UK, with some exposed coastal areas seeing gusty conditions.
Let's start with the good news â for many of us, there's still no need to write off the rest of the bank holiday weekend. It's certainly worth checking the hourly breakdown on your weather app, as showers can be tricky to forecast and conditions could change quite quickly through the day.
Most areas will still see some drier and sunnier moments, with parts of northern and western Scotland perhaps seeing very little rainfall at all.
During the sunnier spells, the late-August sunshine still has enough strength to make it feel reasonably warm too.
Will it rain everywhere for the rest of the bank holiday weekend?
After a quiet start to the day on Sunday, a zone of heavy and potentially thundery showers are expected to develop widely and will sweep eastwards from the west.
The Met Office have issued yellow thunderstorm warnings across large parts of the UK for Sunday.
Looking ahead to Bank Holiday Monday, south-eastern parts could once again see some of the best conditions. There'll be scattered showers in the west during the morning, gradually spreading eastwards through the day, but they're not expected to be as intense as those seen over the weekend.
Gusty winds in southern areas
If bouts of rain wasn't enough, parts of southern England and Wales will continue to be buffeted by strong winds at times too. This may make travel and camping a challenge at times.
Sunday will see stronger winds across southern areas of England and Wales as low pressure slowly crosses the country.
Monday will be a blustery day more widely across the UK, but again it will be southern areas seeing the strongest gusts - generally 30-40mph.
This will make for a cooler feeling spell of weather at times. Temperatures across the UK will be around 15 to 22 Celsius, a shade below the average for the time of year.
With numerous festivals on this weekend, including Reading and Leeds, Creamfields and the Notting Hill Carnival it is worth keeping across the forecast.
Should any further weather warnings be issued, or existing ones updated, you'll find the latest information on the BBC Weather app or our website.