- Published
Russia has attacked Ukraine with ballistic missiles and drones, killing at least 21 people, as Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky said interceptors "could have saved lives".
Kyiv and the surrounding region experienced the deadliest strikes it had seen this year overnight, with 17 people reported dead. Attacks in Kharkiv and Donetsk also killed one and three people respectively.
Ukraine, who has consistently urged allies for more US-made Patriot missile interceptors to defend against Russian ballistics, has not reported intercepting any of the missiles in the overnight attack.
Zelensky added delays in receiving anti-ballistic systems from partners leads to "horrific casualties and destruction".
The president later said the supply of interceptors from allies had been "significantly reduced" this year.
Russia's defence ministry said it had struck logistics hubs and supply centres in Kyiv and the surrounding region.
"These centres were involved in the storage, delivery of various weapons and military supplies, as well as in the production and distribution of unmanned aerial vehicles," it said.
It also said it had hit three cargo vessels "which were transporting weapons and military equipment" near the Black Sea port of Odesa.
Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko said there were fears people could be trapped under rubble, after residential buildings, a railway station and warehouses were hit.
Ukraine's emergency services said one person had died in the city of Kyiv and at least 16 injured, with a further 16 dead and 29 injured in the wider region.
Meanwhile, one person had died and several were injured - including one who was in a critical condition - from Russian shelling in Kharkiv, the regional head Oleh Syniehubov said.
Three people were also killed in Donetsk and 27 injured, the governor Vadym Filashkin said.
Fires were still being extinguished in five locations across the Kyiv region on Wednesday, covering an area of approximately 230,000 sq m, it added.
Ukraine's air force said in a post on Telegram that Russia had launched 24 ballistic missiles and four anti-ship missiles during the attack on the capital.
It added that 115 drones had been launched by Russia during last night's attack and air defence systems intercepted 98 of them.
Ukrainian air force data analysed by BBC Verify shows missile interceptions over the last month have fallen compared with the same period last year (44.4% in 2026, 66.7% in 2025).
Ukraine intercepted 156 of 351 Russian missiles launched between 6 July and 5 August 2026 compared with 128 of 192 during the same period in 2025.
The data also represents an increase in Russian missile launches of 83% this month compared with last year.
Analysis of drone interceptions from the air force for the same period shows an increase this month compared with last year. Between 6 July and 5 August 2026, 85.8% of drones were intercepted compared with 60.2% for the same period in 2025.
Russia has intensified attacks on Kyiv in recent weeks, while Ukraine has also increased its attacks on Russian civilian infrastructure, including power facilities.
Dmitry Milyaev, the governor of Russia's Tula region, said on Wednesday that a drone had crashed into a warehouse of e-commerce giant Wildberries in the region overnight and caused a fire.
He said on Telegram that one person had been injured and there had been no deaths reported, with the retailer saying firefighting teams were working at the site and the facility had been evacuated pre-emptively.
Ukraine has repeatedly targeted warehouses, including those operated by Wildberries. Five people were killed and 10 wounded in the Moscow region on Tuesday morning in the most recent strikes on warehouses.
The day before, Russian officials said seven people were killed and 58 injured after a drone hit a busy beach in the southern Krasnodar region.
Ukraine, meanwhile, expressed outrage over a video showing a man chased by a drone in Kherson, calling it a deliberate "hunt" and "safari" targeting civilians.
Both sides have denied deliberately targeting civilians.
European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said on Wednesday the EU had received â¬1.4bn (Â£1.2bn) from immobilised Russian assets, which would be used to support Ukraine in its war against Russia.
Additional reporting by Paul Brown, BBC Verify
Correction 6 August 2026: The article originally reported that the number of Russian drones intercepted by Ukraine between 6 July and 5 August 2026 had dropped by three percentage points (85.8% in 2026, 88.4% in 2025). This has been amended to explain that drone interceptions during this period increased to 85.8%, up from 60.2% the previous year. This follows revised analysis of the Ukrainian air force's data because the original analysis counted all incidents of drones being shot down, lost, presumed suppressed or failed to reach their targets as interceptions rather than just those that were shot down.