- Published
Girlguiding has unveiled the first major redesign of its uniform range in more than 30 years, with the aim of allowing its members the "freedom to express themselves".
Under the new, pared-back approach, members will only be required to wear a top from the new range to be considered "in uniform".
The new range has been inspired by feedback from thousands of Guides, Rainbows, Brownies and Rangers that suggested they valued choice and the ability to express their own style.
Girlguiding chief executive Felicity Oswald said "practicality, comfort and sustainability" were at the centre of the redesign, which is the first overhaul of all sections' uniforms since 1990.
The organisation said the uniform combines the charity's heritage with modern colours and prints.
The range is made up of 30 items of clothing, 15 accessories and neckerchiefs - with prices starting at £12 for a T-shirt.
Design features include hidden pockets in waist bands, thumb holes and badge sashes which double as cross-body bags.
"It's really comfortable," Isy, 12, who is in the Guides, told BBC Breakfast. "It doesn't feel like the old ones and it's practical to move in."
Poppy, a seven-year-old Brownie, said she wanted "loads of pockets, because I always lose badges, so I wanted somewhere to put them".
She also showed off the new Brownies gilet, which doubles as a pillow. "It has another secret pocket," Poppy added.
1 of 4
This is the first time in 30 years Girlguiding has updated its entire range at the same time.
Oswald said the range was "all about providing girls with the freedom to express themselves, whilst feeling part of our amazing organisation".
Members do not have to buy the new range straightaway and they can continue to wear the old uniform until they need a replacement.
Chief Girl Guide Tracey Foster told BBC Radio 4's Today programme that girls could continue to wear "what you feel comfortable in".
"If you love that current polo shirt, then wear it until it falls to bits," she said.
A Girlguiding survey in June of 2,000 girls aged six to 16 in the UK found that 93% said they felt most comfortable when able to choose how they styled themselves.
Angellica Bell, a Girlguiding ambassador and presenter, said the new design gives "girls and volunteers the freedom to style it the way that suits them".
She added: "The new uniform empowers girls and volunteers to embrace their individuality."