- Published
A woman has been given a suspended prison sentence after her XL bully dog attacked and killed her cousin.
Kelcie Reed, 24, of Bristol, previously admitted being in charge of a dog dangerously out control, causing the death of Morgan Dorsett.
The 19-year-old, from Shrewsbury, died from neck injuries caused by the attack, which happened at Reed's flat in south Bristol in February 2025.
At Bristol Crown Court, Judge Anna Richardson sentenced Reed to 18 weeks in prison, suspended for 18 months. She will also be required to undergo mental health treatment.
Emergency services were called to the dog attack at a flat in Cobhorn Drive, Bishopsworth, but despite their best efforts, Morgan died from bites to her neck and face, a post-mortem examination ruled.
The dog, named Prince, which belonged to Reed and her boyfriend, was sedated at the scene and later "humanely destroyed", police said.
Reed, who appeared emotional throughout the proceedings, wept in the dock as the sentence was read out.
The judge told her: "Rather than putting everyone through the additional trauma of a trial, you accepted responsibility.
"You are someone who has over the last 18 months done what they needed to do to try and move forward. You need to continue to do that."
The court heard a post-mortem examination revealed cocaine in Morgan's system, which had caused her to "act erratically".
"Morgan's behaviour was unusual, and when she sat up she began to scream upon seeing Prince. That led him to barking and ultimately, he attacked her," Richardson said.
The judge also noted Reed had attempted to intervene and stop the attack, suffering cuts and bruises herself, but was ultimately "unsuccessful".
In a victim impact statement, Morgan's mother Marie Smith said the family now "lives under a shadow", with every major milestone "tainted" without her present.
She told the court she struggled to sign birthday cards from the family, leaving an empty spot where her daughter's signature should be.
"Morgan's death has affected our family so deeply it's hard to put into words who she was and what we've lost," she said.
"It's something I carry with me all the time. It's impossible not to feel like something's missing. We find ourselves saying 'Morgan would've loved this' in happy moments.
"I don't think I'll ever be able to fully explain how much this has changed every part of our lives."
Morgan's younger sister, Caeila Dorsett, described her as a "super bubbly" and sociable person; a "built in best friend" from the day she was born.
"We did everything together - wore matching outfits, went to the same schools, had all the same friends, even shared a room for 16 years," she told BBC Newsbeat.
"She was definitely the person to take the good out of every situation and make it the centre. She was the first person I'd tell about anything exciting.
"That's what I try and do now, just bring some of Morgan's positivity into my everyday life."
'Loopholes' in legislation
The 19-year-old said she initially "felt sorry" for Reed having to witness the fatal attack on a family member, but that in the 18 months since the incident, she felt her cousin had "not shown any remorse or compassion".
In her victim impact statement, she told the court: "We continue to live with so many unanswered questions which makes it difficult to find any sense of peace."
The family say they are working alongside the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs in a bid to remove "loopholes" from current legislation around banned dog breeds.
This will look at, for example, whether a dog is living with someone other than the exemption certificate holder, which can be difficult to track and enforce.
Det Sgt Rich Glanville from Avon and Somerset Police described the investigation as "complex and challenging", adding it was the "first of its kind" for the force.
"As police officers we're trained to deal with a multitude of situations, but I don't think something like this could ever be trained for," he said.
"It was a horrendous incident which cost someone their life, and the impact to the officers and ambulance crew that attended would be something they'll never forget."
Glanville said he hoped the primary takeaway from Morgan's death would be one of responsibility for dog owners, to ensure legislation is being followed and suitable precautions are considered.
"The dog is on the [banned breeds] list for a reason, but owners have to be responsible as well," he said.
"You have to look at the dog's past to try and truly understand what temperament that dog has, what training that dog has had, and whether you are a suitable person to own that type of dog.
"If you feel that people are not going to be safe, then you should be taking action."
If you are concerned that your dog is becoming dangerous, Glanville advises contacting a vet or specially trained dog liaison officers at the force for advice.
Additional reporting by Jared Evitts and Alastair McKee