Türkiye's changes to child detention 'raise serious human rights concerns'
Adopted on Saturday, the changes to the Child Protection Law broadly increase sentences for offenders aged 15 to 18, empower judges to decline age-based sentence reductions for those accused of intentional killing or aggravated injury and mandate the detention of child offenders in closed juvenile institutions - rather than education centres focused on rehabilitation.
"While some of the proposals may be positive - such as those that aim to ensure better coordination between child protection and education services and to prevent children from accessing firearms - others raise serious human rights concerns," Mr. Türk said.
"I am particularly alarmed by the possibility that child offenders could be sentenced to life imprisonment."
The UN has previously expressed concern about arbitrary detentions under the administration of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan - most notably the arrest of opposition leader Ekrem İmamoğlu and protesters who supported him.
Call for rehabilitation
Mr. Türk deplored the mandatory detention clause, which breaks from the current practice of holding child offenders in education-based institutions.
He added that justice systems - including juvenile justice - should combine accountability with rehabilitation, while also providing individualised support and opportunities for reintegration into society.
"A focus on rehabilitation and reintegration is essential to protect victims and to reduce re-offending," Mr. Türk said. "It contributes to safer communities for everyone."
Focus on international law
According to Article 37 of the UN's 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child, the arrest, detention or imprisonment of a child must be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time.
Mr. Türk said any lengthy detention measures sanctioned for Turkish children "clearly run counter" to the convention.
Türkiye became a signatory in 1990 and ratified the convention in 1994. It gave formal statements on its interpretation of several articles, but not Article 37.
Mr. Türk urged Türkiye to abide by its commitments under international law.
"It is essential that the law is amended to ensure that all of its provisions are fully aligned with Türkiye's international human rights law obligations, including on children's rights," Mr. Türk said.