Venezuela: IOM warns of potential El Niño threat to families displaced by earthquake
Thousands of people remain displaced three weeks after the devastating earthquakes in Venezuela and the possible formation of a strong El Niño climate pattern could worsen their already dire situation, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) warned on Thursday.
The UN agency and partners are incorporating this risk into response planning as humanitarian operations shift from search and rescue to recovery.
The powerful twin earthquakes struck on 24 June causing extensive damage across several states. More than 4,000 people were killed according to international reports, citing authorities.
Families in need
"While significant response efforts are currently underway, humanitarian needs remain considerable," said Leah Poggio, IOM's Chief of Mission in Venezuela, speaking from Caracas.
"Many displaced families continue to face uncertainty regarding their housing situation, access to healthcare, and their ability to meet the basic daily needs.
IOM has assisted almost 7,000 people in displacement sites and delivered over 10,000 services, including temporary accommodation, healthcare, psychosocial support and protection assistance.
Moreover, 20,000 people have received some form of assistance from the government and UN agencies.
Moving towards recovery
IOM is now scaling up response through an approach that addresses both the immediate humanitarian needs and longer-term recovery priorities. After three weeks, response is increasingly shifting towards early recovery.
Lucas Guedes Hackradt, the agency's Disaster Risk Reduction Coordinator in Venezuela, said the international responders withdrawing from the country are mainly search and rescue teams but humanitarians remain on the ground "and are continuing to scale up their emergency assistance programming."
El Niño concerns
He noted that one of the main concerns is the management of debris, both because of its environmental impacts and the risk that adverse weather conditions could complicate overall response.
The UN system has been discussing the potential of a "really strong El Niño system developing," he said. In the Americas, the naturally occurring phenomenon causes extreme weather conditions such as drought or heavy rainfall.
The concern is that El Niño "could hit Venezuela in a moment where people are already displaced" and IOM and partners are discussing how to ensure response remains operational should this happen.
Continuous support is essential
Against the backdrop of immense needs, IOM has launched an appeal to sustain emergency assistance, shelter, access to basic services, and early recovery efforts over the next 12 months.
"The needs created by the disaster will not disappear as attention might shift elsewhere," said Ms. Poggio.
"Continuous support will be essential to help families to reconnect with their communities, to rebuild their homes, restore their livelihoods, and create the conditions for a safer and more sustainable future."