South Sudan: UN mission decries deadly attacks, works to calm tensions after 'nothing but devastation'
The near simultaneous attacks - which occurred on Sunday in two communities in Tonj North county - caused widespread displacement as well as the destruction and looting of property, including theft of large numbers of cattle.
The acting head UNMISS Graham Maitland said intercommunal violence is causing immense harm to communities that are already vulnerable, and he warned of the risk of further revenge attacks.
Assess and engage
The mission is sending a long-duration peacekeeping patrol to the impacted area.
"Blue helmets" will assess the security situation, investigate human rights violations, and help deter further conflict.
UNMISS is engaging intensively with officials at all levels to de-escalate tensions, calling on the authorities to strengthen security in the area and ensure accountability.
Patrols in Upper Nile
Meanwhile, peacekeepers have also increased patrols in parts of eastern Upper Nile state, where people are returning to their villages following intense clashes between government and opposition armed groups.
Civilians are bearing the brunt of the fighting.
The violence forced families to flee. Many lost their homes, livelihoods and much-loved relatives along the way, the mission said.
'Nothing but devastation'
"We lost people in the bushes and later returned to find nothing but devastation; our homes were deliberately burned down by fire," said Thabitha Nyitapo, Women's Leader in Udier village.
She said the entire community was drawing water from a single borehole, while pregnant women had nowhere safe to deliver their babies and children lacked medicine.
'Everything was looted'
Today, Udier has become a place of refuge for more than 36,000 displaced people and returning residents as a fragile calm takes hold.
However, immense challenges lie ahead as people wonder how they will build their lives with no secure shelter, reliable access to food, clean water, healthcare, education, or the means to earn an income.
"We have no school now," said Wochan Wuordol, Commissioner of Udier. He told UNMISS that "everything was looted" - including hospital beds, educational materials and even chairs, and "there is nothing here now".
Ease the tension
UNMISS peacekeepers recently patrolled the area to assess the security situation, meet local authorities and hear directly from affected communities.
The mission said its priority is to protect civilians, reduce tensions and help ensure that life-saving humanitarian assistance can reach people most in need.
"People in this community have different political views which can cause tension," said William Jial, an UNMISS Civil Affairs Officer. "Our goal is to ensure that, regardless of their differences, they can live peacefully together."