Surge in displacement following fighting in southwest Yemen
At least 46,000 people have been displaced since renewed fighting last week between Houthi rebels and pro-government forces in southwestern Yemen, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) reported on Friday.
Key points
- At least 46,000 people displaced since renewed fighting began last week in southwest Yemen - the figure is "rising by the hour", IOM says
- Houthi fighters have seized the strategic Red Sea port of Mokha, triggering mass departures
- At least 14 civilians, including two children, killed or wounded this month, per OCHA; WHO recorded 67 deaths and 288 injuries between 6-24 August
- Only 60 per cent of Yemen's health facilities are fully operational, WHO says, as hospitals face a surge in trauma cases
- IOM is calling for safe humanitarian access and protection of aid workers and infrastructure
The number approaching 50,000, which as of Thursday covered the governorates of West Coast and Taiz, "is alarmingly rising by the hour", the UN agency warned. The number, which as of Thursday covered the governorates of West Coast and Taiz, "is alarmingly rising by the hour", the UN agency warned.
Overnight, large numbers of people were reportedly seen leaving Mokha with their possessions, after Houthi fighters took control of the strategically important Red Sea port city earlier this week.
The Houthis and Yemeni Government forces, backed by a Saudi Arabia-led coalition, have been locked in a power struggle since 2014.
After years of relative calm, Yemen plunged back into war in July, drawn into the regional conflict triggered in late February by the US-Israeli offensive against Iran.
The clashes that erupted last week have left hundreds dead on both sides, mainly combatants, according to media reports.
As conflict between the Houthis and Saudi forces increases, pro-government forces reportedly withdrew Friday from an island base in the narrow Bab al-Mandab Strait, with militants vowing to continue to target Saudi shipping there.
On the run again
"Families are being forced to flee for the second or third time since the start of this conflict, with almost nothing left," said Amy Pope, the IOM Director General.
"As fighting spreads, reaching people with lifesaving assistance is becoming harder."
New arrivals are being reported in the governorates of Lahj and Aden. There are also reports of people moving north towards Ibb.
Communities under pressure
IOM said entire villages have been emptied in three districts in Taiz - Maqbanah, Jabal Habashi, and Al Ma'afer - as fighting moved closer to populated areas.
The road linking Mokha to Taiz, a vital supply route, has reportedly been cut off and host communities in the region are under increasing pressure.
IOM is calling on all parties to guarantee safe and sustained humanitarian access.
They are also urged to ensure the safety of humanitarian workers, premises, and assets nationwide, and to restore the communication and transport routes necessary for aid delivery.
This is especially critical as emergency stocks are already depleted following recent flood relief efforts. IOM said the most urgent needs are for shelter, food, water, household items, health care and protection support.
Numerous civilian casualties
The escalation is also taking a toll on civilians. At least 14 civilians, including two children, had been killed or wounded since the beginning on the month, the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) said on Thursday,
For its part, the World Health Organization (WHO) recorded 67 deaths and 288 injuries between 6-24 August in seven governorates.
The victims were reported in several regions, from Marib and Hadramout in the east, to Al-Hodeidah in the west, and Taiz in the southwest, as well as Shabwah, Al-Dhale'a and Lahj in the south.
Health services hit
Beyond the human toll, the resumption of fighting is severely straining Yemen's already fragile health system.
Hospitals in Marib, Hadramaut, and Taiz are facing an influx of trauma patients, thus increasing pressure on emergency, surgical, and intensive care units that are already overwhelmed.
According to the WHO, only 60 per cent of health facilities in Yemen are fully operational. Hospitals and emergency services across the country are thus simultaneously facing a sharp increase in demand and limited capacity.
At Marib General Hospital, maternity and obstetrics services have been temporarily suspended to free up additional resources for treating the wounded. The number of deaths has also exceeded the morgue's capacity.
This reallocation of resources toward trauma care is affecting all patients, while facilities are already struggling with shortages of staff, beds, and medical supplies.