'Hunted' by drones: UN reports worst month for Ukraine's civilians since 2022
Civilian casualties in Ukraine soared during the first half of 2026 amid escalating Russian attacks and intensifying use of deadly weapons, the UN human rights monitoring mission in the country, HRMMU, said on Tuesday.
At least 293 civilians were killed and 1,990 injured in June, making it the deadliest month for civilians since April 2022, according to its latest update.
May had already recorded the highest number of civilian casualties in more than four years, with 282 killed and 1,794 injured, but June surpassed it.
Growing risks
"The figures show an alarming escalatory trend with mounting civilian toll, driven by the intensifying use of powerful weapons that are particularly deadly when used in densely populated urban areas," said Danielle Bell, the HRMMU head.
"This trend should serve as a warning that the risks facing civilians are not only persisting but growing in both scale and complexity," she added.
During the first six months of 2026, monitors verified 1,396 civilians killed and 7,978 injured - a 37 per cent rise over the same period in 2025 and a 114 per cent increase compared with 2024.
Deadly missile and drone attacks
The increase was largely driven by use of long-range weapons - powerful missiles with area-wide effects as well as drones - mainly in urban centres far from the frontline, such as the capital Kyiv and the city of Dnipro.
Between January and June, civilian casualties from such attacks increased by 60 per cent compared with 2025.
Meanwhile, short-range drones were responsible for most of the civilian deaths and injuries in areas near the frontline, which reached their highest monthly levels ever in June with 89 killed and 588 injured.
'Shooting and striking day and night'
"Short-range drones have transformed the environment for civilians living near the frontline. The accounts we hear from civilians displaced from frontline communities are deeply consistent - and terrifying," said Ms. Bell.
"Many describe feeling hunted by short-range drones simply for attempting everyday tasks such as shopping for food, walking dogs, cycling, working in the yard or travelling to safety."
The monitors spoke to an older woman who was recently evacuated from the frontline village of Preobrazhenka in the Zaporizhzhia region.
"There were drones everywhere. Everything was flying overhead. I did not know where to hide," she said. "There is terrible fear out there. They are shooting and striking day and night."
Areas under attack
Most civilian casualties occurred in areas under the control of the Government of Ukraine, and across 13 regions and the city of Kyiv. The UN investigators also verified civilian casualties in occupied territory, although fewer compared to 2025.
Russia also reported rising civilian casualties on its territory in the first six months of the year. Authorities said 250 civilians were killed and 1,596 injured, marking a 121 per cent increase compared with the same period in 2025.
Moscow also continued to attack Ukraine's energy infrastructure in June, according to the update, which also documented a sharp increase in Ukrainian attacks against power generation, distribution and transmission facilities in occupied Crimea.
At least 12 such attacks resulted in emergency or scheduled power outages.
Russia launched its full-scale invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022. Since then, UN human rights monitors have verified at least 16,431 civilians killed and 48,613 injured, with more than 3,700 children among the victims - the likely toll is much higher given access constraints.