A hijab inspection, a slap, a warning letter: Inside three months of Taliban rule
A woman is stopped for buying groceries alone. The shopkeeper who served her is slapped and hauled in for questioning. A teacher is turned away from her own classroom for wearing the wrong cloak.
These are not isolated incidents. They are the routine texture of life for Afghans under Taliban rule this spring, according to a new report from the UN mission in the country, UNAMA, that catalogues in granular and often chilling detail how the space for women, minorities and dissent keeps shrinking.
Between April and June 2026, UN human rights monitors recorded arrests over hairstyles, public floggings for broken fasts and the 296th consecutive day that Afghan women have been barred from UN premises simply for being women.
Proper hijab and male guardians
Between 6 and 8 June, at least 30 women were arrested in Herat for wearing "improper hijab". Days later, the de facto Ministry of Hajj and Religious Affairs announced that "observing hijab" would be the topic of the sermon on 19 June.
Imams received a 10-page document explaining that a hijab should cover the entire body except the eyes, be loose and thick and contain no adornments or fragrance.
During the reporting period, shops and health clinics were instructed not to allow women to enter without a male guardian, or mahram. This was even enforced at shops in Kandahar city that sell cosmetics and other products geared towards women.
In another incident, in Logar province, a woman received a verbal warning for buying groceries without a mahram while the male shopkeeper was slapped and taken to the local Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice Office.
He was released hours later following intervention by community elders and after signing a letter guaranteeing that he would not sell items to unaccompanied women in the future.
Marriage, education and work
In April, the authorities issued a new Code on Judicial Separation of Spouses, which makes a woman's marriage dependent on her guardian's permission.
The decree also "implicitly sanctions child marriage" and "imposes extreme obstacles" on women seeking divorce or separation, the report said.
The authors also recalled that since 7 September 2025, Afghan women have been barred from entering UN premises nationwide, including as staff, contractors or visitors, marking 296 days as of 30 June.
Women and girls also remain excluded from higher education following a December 2022 ban.
Barred from university
Although public university entrance examinations were held nationwide in May and June, only 120,000 male prospective students participated, and no women or girls took part.
Other developments related to education included school inspections by Taliban civil servants from the Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice Office.
In one incident in Herat, female teachers not wearing a full-body cloak called a chador were prevented from entering a girls' school and warned they could lose their jobs.
Arbitrary arrests and capital punishment
Beyond restrictions on women and girls, UNAMA documented at least 389 arbitrary arrests and detentions as well as 65 incidents of ill-treatment carried out by de facto Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice personnel.
Cases were primarily linked to alleged violations of hijab rules for women, having trimmed beards or "Western" haircuts for men and playing or listening to music.
At least 137 judicial corporal punishments (112 men and 25 women) were carried out during the reporting period, including public floggings for offences such as breaking the Ramadan fast and having illicit relationships.
Former officials at risk
Former government officials and former members of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces also remained at risk.
The report documented at least 29 instances of arbitrary arrest and detention, five instances of torture and ill-treatment and eight killings of former security force members between 1 April and 30 June.
Moreover, former officials and former security personnel involuntarily returned to Afghanistan continue to be at risk of rights violations. In one case from Herat, a former Afghan National Army officer reportedly went missing on the same day he was forcibly returned from Iran.
Security and freedom of religion
Regarding security, the report noted that a deadly attack on civilians picnicking in front of a Shia shrine in Herat on 10 April left 12 people dead and 14 others injured. No group claimed responsibility.
Since January, authorities have closed numerous Ismaili places of worship (jamaat khana) in Badakhshan province and instructed worshippers not to use them.
Restrictions also were imposed on Shia community commemorations of Ashura, an important holy day, including detentions linked to religious displays and flags.
Difficult media landscape
The report also outlined several instances of journalist detentions, media outlet suspensions and radio station closures.
These incidents underscore the difficult operating environment for media workers in Afghanistan, where licensing requirements, financial constraints and interventions continue to affect journalists' ability to work.