Lebanon: UN peacekeepers count hundreds of Israeli strikes and incursions in a single weekend
Israeli forces fired 455 projectiles into south Lebanon and breached Lebanese airspace 97 times between Friday and Sunday, the UN's peacekeeping mission in the country reported Monday - among the heaviest fire seen in months.
UNIFIL said Saturday alone accounted for 229 of those projectiles, the highest single-day total since 21 June, alongside an air strike in Al Mansuri on Sunday morning.
Most of the airspace violations came from drones, though helicopters and fighter jets were also involved, UN Deputy Spokesperson Farhan Haq said. Peacekeepers also tracked two Israeli boats moving north through Lebanese waters before turning back south on Friday.
Around the same time, two Israeli Merkava tanks fired three rounds eastward that landed roughly 200 metres from a UN position, while some 30 rounds of small-arms fire were also directed toward the same area.
The activity marks a sharp escalation from the previous weekend, when 113 projectiles - then the highest daily count since 21 June - had been recorded.
Unguarded weapons
Peacekeepers have also discovered unguarded weapons, unexploded ordnances (UXOs) and improvised explosive devices (IEDs) in their area of operations, Mr. Haq said.
A combined UNIFIL-Lebanese army patrol on Friday found a 107mm rocket launcher loaded with one rocket alongside several additional rockets along a road in Sector East. They were referred to national forces for further action.
On the same day, peacekeepers found and neutralised two unexploded ordnances in Sector East. Two IEDs were discovered in Sector West and destroyed on site.
Escalation of violations
Throughout the summer, UNIFIL has reported observing Israel's near daily presence inside Lebanese airspace and military activities on the ground.
These activities violate Security Council resolution 1701, adopted as the internationally agreed framework for peace and stability in south Lebanon, helping to bring an end to the country's 2006 conflict with Israel.
On 5 August, peacekeepers had reported observing 113 projectiles launched by IDF, which was until this past weekend the highest daily number recorded by UNIFIL since 21 June.
Why resolution 1701 still matters
For nearly two decades, UN Security Council resolution 1701 has expanded UNIFIL's role alongside the national army and helped create conditions for one of the longest periods of relative calm that saw communities rebuild their lives, businesses reopen and tourism gradually return.
That progress, however, was disrupted by the escalation that began in late 2023, with exchanges of fire along the 'Blue Line' of separation triggered by the Israel-Hamas war in October 2023, followed by the devastating conflicts of 2024 and 2026, which have left communities once again facing loss, destruction and displacement.
Does resolution 1701 still provide a path towards lasting peace? According to UNIFIL Deputy Head of Mission Hervé Lecoq, the answer is yes.
Foundation for future efforts
Despite setbacks, Mr. Lecoq believes resolution 1701 remains the foundation for future efforts.
"All the initiatives that are being discussed at the moment build on [resolution] 1701," he said.
Indeed, the core issues resolution 1701 seeks to address and the need for a political path towards lasting peace remain as relevant today as they were in 2006.
Assisting local communities
Another focus of UNIFIL peacekeepers in their area of operation has been the various support initiatives for the most affected and vulnerable communities.
On Friday, peacekeepers facilitated three humanitarian missions in both sectors through its liaison branch in coordination with the UN relief agency, OCHA, the UN Deputy Spokesperson said.