World News in Brief: Shipping alert from IMO, democracy vanishing in Nicaragua, alert over political 'denialism'
Amid a rising number of attacks on shipping in key waterways in the Middle East linked to the US-Iran war, the head of UN maritime agency, Mr. Arsenio Dominguez, has insisted that the conflict is not a "pretext" to target "innocent seafarers".
Since the current conflict in the Middle East began on 28 February, the International Maritime Organization, IMO, has verified 80 attacks on international shipping in and around the Strait of Hormuz.
This has resulted in the deaths of at least 22 seafarers and injuries to many others.
In the Black Sea and Sea of Azov, dozens of fatalities have reportedly resulted from attacks on international shipping in recent months, although precise numbers are difficult to verify.
Attacks in the Red Sea have also resumed, with four fatalities confirmed in the latest attack by the Houthis on a merchant vessel on 11 August, the UN agency said.
Here's Roel Hoenders, Chief of Staff at IMO:
"Apart from putting seafarers' lives at risk, attacks on merchant shipping are having a severe impact on global supply chains and people everywhere around the world. - And let's not forget that 22 crew have already been killed since the conflict in the Middle East began on 28 February."
Mr. Dominguez stressed that in the Strait of Hormuz, the Black Sea and Sea of Azov, "it is not only one country attacking merchant vessels".
UN rights chief warns democracy has almost disappeared in Nicaragua
Democracy in Nicaragua is being dismantled at an alarming pace, the UN human rights chief warned on Wednesday, as a new report detailed growing political repression, arbitrary arrests and the silencing of critics.
Presenting the findings, Volker Türk said power is becoming increasingly concentrated in the hands of the executive and the ruling party.
"The report traces the near-total capture of State institutions by the ruling party," he said, describing a pattern of "systematic abuse of power" that has eroded checks and balances and left many people without protection when their rights are violated.
"The situation is utterly indefensible," he added.
Basic rights dismantled
The report covers the period from June 2025 to June 2026 and paints a picture of a country where independent political activity has almost disappeared. It warns that proposed constitutional changes could block organized opposition groups from future elections and extend presidential terms to as long as seven years.
According to the report, the authorities also continue to use arbitrary detention as a tool against dissent. At least 46 people were reportedly still being held at the end of the reporting period, while UN investigators documented ongoing cases of enforced disappearance and deaths in custody.
Mr. Türk called on the Government to immediately free anyone detained without legal grounds.
The report also highlights a sustained crackdown on civil society and the media. More than 5,500 organizations have been dissolved over the past eight years, and at least 56 media outlets have been shut down.
"There is almost nothing left to shut down," the High Commissioner said.
He urged Nicaragua's authorities to reverse course and re-engage with regional and international human rights bodies.
AI's role in 'denialism' trend must be stopped, says rights expert
The Human Rights Council has called on governments everywhere to counter the growing trend of so-called "denialism" politics, which often features the non-acceptance of genocide and other crimes against humanity.
Speaking at the council in Geneva, independent human rights expert, Bernard Duhaime, noted a recent wave of denialist statements by government officials, politicians and other actors worldwide.
Rapporteurs and other independent experts appointed by the council are not UN staff and receive no salary for their work.
Countries must actively counter any efforts to glorify those responsible for crimes against humanity, particularly considering the rise of social media and AI systems which amplify denialism, Mr. Duhaime insisted:
"We live at a dangerous time where ideologues and warmongers seek to fuel polarisation, hatred and chaos for their own political gains. It is high time to remind them of our collective commitment to human rights, accountability, and the rule of law."
Mr. Duhaime, who works in an independent capacity, is tasked by the Human Rights Council to promote truth, justice, reparations and non-recurrence of crimes.
Delivering his report to the Council's 47 Member States, he called on all countries to be vigilant about "politicians and corporate actors who seek to weaponize freedom of expression" and "manipulate history for political or other ideological ends", while also inciting violence and silencing dissenting voices.
"Denialism" is increasingly used to undermine justice for vulnerable populations by spreading divisive narratives, Mr. Duhaime said, explaining that the trend risks eroding democratic institutions and accountability by replacing the truth with "emotionally-charged narratives".
And although government oversight is key to combating supporters of denialism, the independent rights expert warned that "in too many cases" national legislation has become "tools of restriction and denial".
"Combating denialism must never serve as a pretext for censorship or repression," Mr. Duhaime told the Council.