Lebanon: 860,000 displaced people have returned home, but humanitarian crisis remains 'immense'
A fragile ceasefire
The region has suffered years of conflict, with Israeli airstrikes killing thousands and displacing over a million since heavy fighting resumed in March of this year.
Despite multiple ceasefires declared since April, clashes have been ongoing between Hezbollah fighters and Israeli forces.
The most recent cessation of hostilities agreement - negotiated between Israeli and Lebanese officials and brokered by the United States in late June - called for Hezbollah to fully disarm while Israeli forces were to withdraw fully from the south.
Fighting has continued, including this past weekend when Israeli airstrikes sparked a new wave of displacement, with hundreds of families forced to flee northwards.
Ongoing displacement crisis
Around 360,000 people remain displaced, including at least 22,000 people living in collective shelters, according to UN figures.
Many Lebanese are unable to return to their homes, located in areas ravaged by the conflict. Extensive debris, widespread damage to infrastructure and continuing insecurity have resulted in strained or non-functioning health, water and electricity services.
UN refugee agency (UNHCR) spokesperson, Babar Baloch, highlighted on Tuesday the need for temporary housing solutions for displaced families so that they can remain close to their communities:
"Humanitarian needs remain substantial. Widespread damage to housing, water system, electricity networks, schools, health facilities, agriculture, land and community infrastructure continue to constrain prospect of recovery."
Although 860,000 people are reported to have made the journey, many have been unable to enter their own damaged homes, forced to live in temporary quarters nearby.
Many continue to rely on rented accommodation, or temporary hosts, while waiting for debris clearance, home repairs and the restoration of public services.
'Immense' needs remain
Severe damage to housing, water systems, electricity, agricultural land, health facilities and infrastructure continues to prevent sustainable returns and recovery.
Over 700,000 people are still affected by damage to water infrastructure in parts of southern Lebanon.
The Lebanese Government is providing protection services, shelter assistance, financial support, and psychosocial counselling to affected populations, with the help of humanitarian organizations including UNHCR.
Yet agencies themselves face severe funding shortages, limiting their capacity to intervene effectively and at a large scale.
The inter-agency Flash Appeal of $639.9 million is only 48 per cent funded. UNHCR's specific Lebanon operation is only 24 per cent funded against total requirements of $472.3 million for 2026.