Fear grows as freedoms shrink in Uganda
Uganda is experiencing a growing climate of fear as increasing restrictions on fundamental freedoms leave opposition supporters, journalists, human rights defenders and civil society groups at heightened risk of abuse, according to the UN Human Rights Office (OHCHR).
Since the country's general election in January, reports of enforced disappearances, torture, arbitrary arrests and other human rights violations have increased against people perceived to oppose the Government.
According to OHCHR, at least 50 opposition leaders and supporters, five human rights defenders and five journalists have reportedly been subjected to abuses in recent months.
The UN also said authorities have relied on legal provisions that do not comply with international human rights law to detain critics, further contributing to an atmosphere of intimidation and fear.
Civil society under pressure
The crackdown has also extended to civil society. Ten leading organisations have been suspended this year, while others have faced heightened scrutiny and harassment, further shrinking civic space and limiting independent voices.
"The actions of the authorities are creating a climate of fear that is increasing self-censorship, further stifling public debate and deepening polarization," said UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Volker Türk.
His office warned that increasing military involvement in civilian institutions, combined with restrictions on freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association, is eroding the rule of law and encouraging widespread self-censorship.
As civic space continues to shrink, many people are becoming increasingly reluctant to speak out for fear of reprisals.
Call for action
"I call on the Government to abide by its obligations under international human rights law, the African Charter and the Ugandan Constitution to ensure a vibrant civil society where everyone can freely express their views and participate in public affairs" Mr. Türk added.
The UN also called on the authorities to address the country's broader economic and social challenges through a human rights-based approach that promotes inclusion, accountability and equal opportunities for all Ugandans.