Cyprus: Guterres calls for renewed trust and a new meeting on the way forward
The United Nations Secretary-General said on Wednesday that he plans to convene fresh talks on Cyprus to resolve the decades-long division on the Mediterranean island, stressing that the moment calls for rebuilding trust between its two communities.
António Guterres was speaking to journalists in the capital Nicosia at the end of his first official visit to the country, where he met with the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders as well as stakeholders.
Mr. Guterres said he held "frank and constructive discussions" with Nikos Christodoulides and Tufan Erhürman, both separately and together.
Solidarity and a search for a solution
He recalled that the UN has consistently worked to assist the communities "in their efforts to reach a comprehensive, sustainable solution to the Cyprus issue".
The island has been divided since July 1974. Recent UN engagement has focused on rebuilding confidence after years without a formal settlement track.
Since 2017, six meetings have been held in Switzerland, Germany and the United States in this regard.
"In this context, it was my duty to come to Cyprus to express my full solidarity with the people of Cyprus in their quest for a solution," Mr. Guterres said, stressing that "this is the moment when all efforts must be made to rebuild trust."
He appealed to the two leaders to intensify efforts "to define and implement confidence-building measures that can make a difference in the daily lives of all Cypriots".
The Secretary-General said they have both assured him of their determination to continue working with his Personal Envoy, Maria Angela Holguin.
New meeting proposed
"Based on our discussions on the way forward, I decided that I would convene another 5+1 meeting after adequate preparations on confidence building, methodology and substance, taking into account the convergences already achieved," he said.
The 5+1 format brings together the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders, guarantors Greece, Türkiye and the United Kingdom and the UN.
He said the UN will consult with the two sides and the guarantors "to create the conditions for the meeting's success".
A clear message
The Secretary-General noted that throughout the visit, he also had the opportunity to hear from many Cypriots, and their clearest message was a desire for progress.
"They want to see their leaders make compromises and to walk that last mile towards a settlement of the Cyprus issue," he said.
"They want a future in which this island is defined not by division, but by cooperation, opportunity and peace."
Respect UN force
Regarding the situation on the ground, the Secretary-General emphasised the need to respect the mandated authority of the UN peacekeeping operation UNFICYP, both in the buffer zone and UN-delineated ceasefire lines.
The force, which has deployed since 1964, "has helped maintain calm and stability in a sensitive environment" and "its continued effectiveness depends on the cooperation of all sides."
He also commended the work of the Committee on Missing Persons as well as the bicommunal technical committees working to bridge the gap between political negotiations and the everyday concerns of the people, in addition to highlighting his engagement with civil society.
A 'crucial moment'
The Secretary-General concluded his remarks by recognising the significant contributions of the UNFICYP staff and his Mission of Good Offices for their critical roles in supporting peace and stability.
He stressed that "the United Nations cannot impose peace," but "remains fully committed to supporting the people of Cyprus in this crucial moment for the island and the wider region".
Responding to a journalist's question, he pointed to the "important geopolitical movements" and persistent and unending conflicts in a region "where we have seen how conflicts can be enlarged".
He expressed the belief that "a solution in Cyprus is absolutely crucial not only to preserve the interests and the peace of the Cypriot people, but also as a factor of stability in what is becoming a dangerously unstable region."