Guterres calls for stepping up diplomatic efforts to end US-Iran conflict
The United Nations again called for restraint as war ramps up in the Middle East, underscoring the need for dialogue and an end to attacks on "vital infrastructure" across the region.
Secretary-General António Guterres "remains deeply concerned by the continuing and expanding military escalation between Iran and the United States over the past few days," UN Spokesperson Stéphane Dujarric told journalists in New York on Tuesday.
The crisis - now in its second week - initially centred around control of the Strait of Hormuz, a critical maritime corridor for oil and liquified natural gas exports.
It comes in the wake of the collapse of an agreement that sought to end months of fighting following joint US-Israeli bombing of Iran in late February and counterstrikes by Tehran.
Fears of a return to full-on war
Asked if the Secretary-General was personally involved in efforts to promote a return to diplomacy, Mr. Dujarric responded that the UN chief has maintained a consistent message while his Personal Envoy, Jean Arnault, continues engagement.
Describing the current situation as "teetering", he cautioned that "we do not want to see a return to a full-scale conflict."
"I think it is incumbent on the Secretary-General and all parties to do whatever they can to push for a return to diplomacy, and we're very thankful at the mediating lead that Pakistan has taken, assisted by others in that regard," he said.
Ten countries affected
The renewed conflict has already affected Iran, Bahrain, Jordan, Syria, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Qatar, Kuwait, and the United Arab Emirates.
It is placing pressure on trade systems, humanitarian access and transport costs, and on the prices of fuel and basic commodities in those countries and beyond.
Mr. Dujarric said the Secretary-General is particularly concerned about attacks on civilian infrastructure in Iran, including a nuclear power plant under construction and a desalination plant, and across the region.
Stop 'unacceptable' attacks
Power plants and desalination plants in Kuwait and elsewhere have also been hit in air strikes in recent days.
"Such attacks are unacceptable and must stop immediately," he said.
He stressed that the Secretary-General has again reiterated that there is no military solution to the conflict and calls for intensifying diplomatic efforts towards a peaceful and durable settlement.
Such agreement "should include the full restoration of international navigational rights and freedom of navigation in and around the Strait of Hormuz."
He added that "vital infrastructure on which civilians rely for survival, including hospitals and water supplies, must be spared."
The UN urged all parties to respect their obligations under international humanitarian law, including the principles of "distinction, proportionality and precaution" to minimize potential harm to civilians.