Zambia: Arrests and detention of political opponents following election raises concern
In the wake of President Hakainde Hichilema of Zambia's re-election for a second five-year term, UN human rights chief has raised concerns over the reported arrests and detention of political opponents in the country.
On 13 August, the incumbent president and his party won parliamentary and presidential elections by large margins.
Mr. Hichilema - who was officially announced the winner on Tuesday morning - garnered around 60 per cent of the votes, with his main challenger Brian Mundubile on 38 per cent - ahead of 12 other contenders.
Contested results
Mr. Mundubile declared himself the winner before the final results were announced, claiming without providing evidence that the poll was rigged, according to news reports.
He says there were discrepancies between the results found at polling stations and those announced officially, and that military involvement during the vote count had altered the final results. The opposition leader has called for an urgent independent investigation.
Opposition targeted
Over the weekend the Zambian Government said that police had raided a house resulting in an exchange of gunfire and the arrest of several opposition figures who were accused of planning a potential coup aided by foreign militia, according to reports.
Mr. Mundubile has dismissed the Government allegations as a fabrication and his political party reported that he is now in a "secure location".
President Hichilema told media outlets on Tuesday that criminal charges would be brought against those arrested.
Family members of one of those new detained - an Anglican bishop - have reportedly raised concerns that they had not heard from him for two days and had not been told where he was being held.
Due process must be upheld: Türk
The UN human rights chief Volker Türk voiced deep concern over the situation and urged authorities on Wednesday to "to stop arresting people arbitrarily and to uphold fully the due process rights of all those detained."
He said all detainees "must be notified at the time of their arrest of the reasons for their arrest and promptly informed of any charges against them.
"They must also be allowed access to legal representation, as well as communication with their families. They must be treated humanely while in custody and brought promptly before a judge."