UN chief hails Syria's 'moment of possibility' on first visit since fall of Assad regime
Syria has an opportunity not only to recover from conflict but to build "a future that is more stable, more inclusive and more prosperous for all Syrians", UN Secretary-General António Guterres said in Damascus on Saturday as he began a landmark visit to the country.
Calling Syria "today the pillar of stability of the Middle East", the UN chief said the country "stands at a moment of possibility" and urged the international community to seize the opportunity to help rebuild a nation emerging from more than a decade of conflict.
Addressing reporters alongside Foreign Minister Asaad al‐Shaibani, Mr. Guterres described his visit as "an extremely meaningful" one, rooted in decades of engagement with Syrians as former UN High Commissioner for Refugees and later as Secretary-General.
"For years, long before becoming Secretary-General, I worked closely with Syrians," he said, recalling communities that welcomed refugees fleeing conflict and persecution, as well as Syrian families later forced to flee their own country.
"I met young Syrians whose hopes were simple and universal: to learn, to work, to contribute, and to live in peace."
Those experiences, he said, remained with him and helped explain why it was important for him to be in Damascus now.
"Indeed, I made a conscious decision not to come to Syria since the beginning of the brutal repression of the Syrian people in 2011 until the fall of the regime."
A chance to build a new future
The Secretary-General said Syrians had endured years of "hardship, loss and uncertainty" but had never lost the resilience, talent and creativity that define the country.
"Today, Syria stands at a moment of possibility.
"The opportunity now is not only to recover from conflict, but to lay the foundations for a future that is more stable, more inclusive and more prosperous for all Syrians."
He stressed that rebuilding the country would require leadership and trust, while ensuring that all Syrians see themselves reflected in the nation's future.
"Above all, it will require that every Syrian sees a place for themselves in the future of their country.
"And it is for Syrians to define their path forward and shape the institutions that will serve future generations."
A 'moment for partnership and solidarity'
The UN chief warned that no country emerging from more than a decade of conflict could rebuild alone and appealed for stronger international engagement.
"This is a moment that requires the international community to support Syria with determination and foresight," he said.
"Syria's recovery is a humanitarian imperative - and it is also an investment in development, in peace and regional stability."
He said the international community should help create conditions for economic recovery, restore essential services and infrastructure, expand livelihoods and employment opportunities, and support the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees and displaced people.
"International financial institutions and development partners also have an important role to play in helping Syria reconnect with regional and global economic opportunities."
"This is the moment for partnership and solidarity."
Emphasizing the UN's role, he said the Organization stood ready to accompany Syria through its transition.
"We are ready to support your political transition, including your efforts to ensure transitional justice, draft a permanent constitution, and hold free and fair elections."
"We have no UN agenda for Syria. Our agenda is the agenda of the Syrian government and the Syrian people."
Sovereignty and territorial integrity
Mr. Guterres also reiterated the UN's support for Syria's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
"We underscore the importance of fully respecting Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity, and territorial integrity."
"Violations of Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity are unacceptable and must cease."
Referring to developments around the Golan Heights, he added: "What is happening in the region around the Golan Heights is totally unacceptable."
"I'd like to remind the international community that the Golan Heights are Syrian territory."
The Secretary-General said the UN would continue working with Syrians and international partners in support of "a future defined by peace, dignity and opportunity by the Syrians themselves."
Pressed on Israel's actions in Syria
Taking questions from journalists, the UN chief reiterated his call for an end to violations of Syrian territorial integrity and said the international community needed to take a more active role.
"We consider that the present situation is intolerable and that that situation needs to stop," he said, while noting that UN personnel on the ground were working to mitigate the impact of ongoing developments.
While acknowledging divisions within the UN Security Council, he pledged continued advocacy on the issue, insisting that "what is Syrian is Syrian and cannot be taken away."
Visit continues
The visit marks the Secretary-General's first trip to Syria since the fall of the former regime. During his stay, he is expected to meet President Ahmed al‐Sharaa and other senior officials, and meet women's groups, civil society representatives and members of diverse communities.
On Monday, Mr. Guterres is scheduled to address the new People's Assembly of the Syrian Arab Republic before travelling onward to Cyprus.