World News in Brief: Appeal for calm in Kashmir, women on the move, increased Ebola deaths in communities, 12th anniversary of MH17
Dozens of people, mostly protesters but also law enforcement personnel, have reportedly been killed since June ahead of the vote for the Legislative Assembly on 27 July.
The protests have been led by the Joint Awami Action Committee (JAAC), a movement whose members include traders, students and lawyers.
The group has been banned under anti-terrorism laws for allegedly threatening public order and security, and several of its leaders have been arrested.
Growing concerns
UN human rights office (OHCHR) spokesperson Jeremy Laurence said the crackdown had raised concerns over fundamental freedoms.
"The criminalisation of a civil society organization and imposition of strict limitations on gatherings raise serious concerns about infringements on the rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association."
Mr. Laurence also highlighted the High Commissioner's call to restore full internet access to the region and urged meaningful and inclusive political dialogue to address underlying issues and grievances.
Women now make up majority of migrants in Europe and Central Asia
Women now account for 54 per cent of all migrants in Europe and Central Asia, according to UN Women. This highlights a major shift in migration patterns across the region.
Their new report finds that more women are migrating independently in search of education, decent work, safety and economic opportunity, rather than accompanying family members.
"Migration has the face of a woman. It is time we see it," said Belén Sanz Luque, UN Women Regional Director for Europe and Central Asia.
The report says the trend is unfolding amid the war in Ukraine, unresolved regional conflicts and growing climate pressures, including floods, droughts and extreme heat.
Facing barriers
While migration has opened new opportunities, women continue to face barriers.
Many highly educated migrant women are overqualified for the jobs they hold, while others remain concentrated in low-paid and insecure sectors, where they face greater risks of exploitation and gender-based violence.
The report also highlights the disproportionate impact of conflict and trafficking on women.
Between 2022 and 2024, women made up the majority of migrants from both Ukraine and Moldova arriving in the European Union, while women and girls accounted for most identified victims of human trafficking in several countries across the region.
UN Women called on governments to expand safe and regular migration pathways, strengthen labour protections, improve recognition of qualifications and ensure migrant and refugee women are included in decisions affecting their lives.
Most Ebola deaths in DR Congo outbreak occurring outside health facilities
The ongoing Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) has surged by around 70 per cent over the past two weeks, with more than 40 new cases reported each day, the UN migration agency (IOM) warned on Friday.
IOM said 60 per cent of reported deaths are occurring in communities rather than health facilities, highlighting major gaps in early detection, surveillance and timely access to care.
Frantz Celestin, IOM's Regional Director, warned that the true scale of the outbreak is likely unclear in some areas.
Increasing concerns
The outbreak has spread into two new provinces, Haut-Uele and Tshopo, increasing concerns about transmission among highly mobile populations.
IOM said nearly 150,000 internally displaced people living in agency-supported sites in eastern DRC are particularly vulnerable.
The agency called for stronger surveillance at border crossings and along the Congo River to help prevent further spread within the DRC and across neighbouring countries.
As of 14 July, more than 2,000 confirmed Ebola cases and 700 deaths had been reported across the affected countries of the DRC and Uganda.
UN chief calls for accountability on 12th anniversary of MH17 tragedy
UN Secretary-General António Guterres on Thursday marked the 12th anniversary of the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17 over eastern Ukraine, renewing his solidarity with the families of the 298 victims and calling for continued efforts to hold those responsible to account.
"On this occasion, the Secretary-General stands in full solidarity with the families of the victims and in honour of their memory," his spokesperson said.
Flight MH17 was travelling from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur when it was shot down over Ukraine's Donetsk region on 17 July 2014, killing all on board.
The victims included 193 Dutch nationals, 43 Malaysians and 27 Australians, as well as other nationalities.
Call for cooperation
The Secretary-General reiterated his call for all UN Member States to fully cooperate in line with Security Council resolution 2166, which was adopted unanimously days after the tragedy and called for a full, thorough and independent international investigation.
His appeal follows years of investigations into the incident, including the work of the independent Joint Investigation Team.