'I consider it a miracle': Pregnant woman pulled from post-quake rubble in Venezuela
"I saw the building collapse, floor by floor. You could hear people screaming and calling for help," said Roberto Rodríguez, 24, who survived two catastrophic earthquakes of magnitudes 7.2 and 7.5 that struck the central-northern region of Venezuela on 24 June.
Having just returned home, he had yet to reach his apartment.
"Bricks and pieces of debris started falling on me. I took off running, saw other people and shouted, 'run, run!' At that very moment, the entire building came crashing down," he said.
Pinned down in the rubble
"My partner was trapped under the rubble," Mr. Rodríguez said. "She was pinned down from her feet downward, and the neighbours immediately began helping to get her out. It took us about two hours to free her."
Although Dayra Morales, 20, was found and treated for her injuries, both Mr. Rodríguez's father and young sister died in the disaster.
Almost 5,000 people have been killed and over 16,000 injured, while thousands still remain unaccounted for and an estimated 18,000 people have lost their homes, with temporary shelters set up for those displaced.
Hope amid turmoil
Mr. Rodríguez and Ms. Morales are currently staying at one set up at the José María Vargas sports complex along with over 1,000 other displaced people.
Having received medical care and health and sanitary supplies from the UN's sexual and reproductive health agency, UNFPA, Ms. Morales also got a welcome surprise.
"While we were here, on 2 July, my father's birthday, we found out through my partner's medical examinations that she is pregnant," said Mr. Rodríguez.
"Nothing happened to the baby, even after she fell from the sixth floor of a 12-story building and was trapped from the waist down under so much rubble. I consider it a true miracle."
Support networks hold communities together
Now, Ms. Morales is among those receiving prenatal care from a UNFPA-supported clinic in the shelter.
In coordination with national authorities, UNFPA is providing sexual and reproductive health services across three shelters in Caracas, La Guaira and Miranda, including prenatal consultations, distribution of contraceptive methods, testing for sexually transmitted infections and referrals to hospitals for obstetric emergencies.
Among the volunteers is Yoseys Escalona, 40, who is also sheltering at the José María Vargas sports complex along with her husband and son.
"In the tent I'm staying in, 12 families live together. The number varies. Some have 15, others 20, and some have as many as 25 families."
'One family' helping each other
Ms. Escalona described her group as "one family", with the women leading efforts to help people get back on their feet.
"We are always looking for ways to help and support one another," she said. "So many women keep moving forward despite the pain, even after losing their homes, even after losing a family member."
Like most survivors of the earthquakes, more than two weeks later, Ms. Escalona has yet to return home. Over 20,000 people have sought refuge in more than 100 temporary shelters, where overcrowding, limited essential services, family separation and rising psychosocial distress are exacerbating protection risks.
Tackling gender-based violence
As the designated representative of her tent, Ms. Escalona has become an ally in raising awareness of gender-based violence.
Through information sessions held by UNFPA and partners, she has learned about the services available to survivors and where to take them to access treatment, psychosocial support, case management and legal counselling.
Eugenia Sekler, head of UNFPA's office in Venezuela said that, as in all humanitarian crises, strengthening gender-based violence prevention and ensuring safe access to survivor-centred services is critical.
"We are distributing medical supplies to health providers for the clinical management of rape, as well as undertaking assessments at the shelters and working with the Government and partners to strengthen safety measures," she said.
From response to recovery
At the same time, Ms. Escalona fears the wider ramifications of the crisis will ripple on much longer still.
"There are mothers here who have lost everything," she said. "And when I say everything, I mean everything: their home, their mother, their children and their husband. Some are completely alone. Now they don't have a home, they have nothing, but they're alive."
To sustain its interventions for the first three months of the emergency response, UNFPA is calling for $10 million. In addition to ensuring critical health services and gender-based violence protection, shipments of essential reproductive health supplies and medical equipment are being mobilised to support affected communities.