Decades of war have left 'depth and breadth' of trauma across Afghanistan, UN finds
Victims of Afghanistan's decades-long armed conflict continue to suffer profound physical, psychological, social and economic consequences, often without access to justice, reparation or formal acknowledgement of the harm done to them, according to a new UN report.
Afghanistan has endured over 40 years of continuous warfare, causing widespread death, displacement and destruction.
Between 2009 and 2021 - as fighting ground on between coalition and coalition-backed Government forces, the Taliban and other militants - the UN mission in the country (UNAMA) documented more than 40,000 civilians killed and more than 77,000 wounded caused by the conflict.
The report focuses on this period of conflict up to the Taliban takeover, interviewing almost 200 victims of armed conflict and their relatives.
Enduring harm
95 per cent of people interviewed experienced emotional or psychological harm, reporting depression, anxiety, memory loss, flashbacks and other trauma-related symptoms.
Nearly 60 per cent also experienced physical harm, with injuries continuing to affect them for months, years or even decades after the event.
Some victims continue to live with chronic pain and disabilities which they struggle to address due to financial barriers and/or lack of available healthcare in Afghanistan.
For some, their injuries prevented them from continuing their education and work, with serious economic consequences for them and their families. In some cases, relatives have also had to give up work or school to provide care.
Women widowed by the conflict face particular economic insecurity, as restrictions imposed by Afghanistan's de facto authorities limit their access to employment.
No justice for the victims
Yet victims of the war have been unable to obtain justice.
More than half of those interviewed (55 per cent) had never attempted to seek compensation or any form of redress, often because they believe their concerns would not be taken seriously - or because they feared retaliation.
Among those who did try, 64 per cent reported that their efforts were unsuccessful. They cited bureaucratic obstacles, lack of response, perceived discrimination, and limited transparency when engaging with authorities or institutions.
When asked about their needs, victims identified financial compensation (81 per cent), access to justice (48 per cent) and personal security guarantees (47 per cent).
"The interviews we conducted highlight the depth and breadth of collective trauma that continues within Afghan society," said Georgette Gagnon, a UNAMA official.
"Key to addressing the needs of victims is an acknowledgement of the harm done and a genuine commitment to putting victims' voices and rights at the center," she stressed.