900 obstacles and counting: West Bank families trapped as aid access shrinks
Humanitarians continue to provide life-saving assistance to people across the Occupied Palestinian Territory despite facing obstacles such as checkpoints, instability and access restrictions, the United Nations said on Friday.
In the West Bank, aid partners warn that their work "is being delayed and limited by a network of over 900 physical obstacles - including checkpoints, gates, roadblocks and other restrictions," UN Associate Spokesperson Daniela Gross told journalists in New York.
On Friday, humanitarian and municipal workers were struggling to secure access to three Palestinian families in Qusra village near Nablus who have been trapped since Tuesday following the establishment of a settlement next to their homes and the tightening of access restrictions in the area.
Serve and protect
The UN human rights office, OHCHR, previously warned that "time is running out" before the families are forcibly displaced.
Ms. Gross said UN partners and municipal workers had been trying to deliver food, water, milk formula, medicines and hygiene items to them, without success.
"Our colleagues warn that efforts to protect Palestinians have been ineffective, with settlers reportedly reinstalling a tent that Israeli forces had dismantled yesterday," she said.
Dire situation in the north
She added that the humanitarian situation in the northern West Bank "remains particularly severe".
Since January, UN partners have provided psychosocial support, case management, and services for children with disabilities, and other vital assistance.
Nearly 30,000 children and 15,000 adults have been served during this period.
Support in Gaza
Meanwhile, humanitarians in the Gaza Strip continue to provide vital aid to the population despite persistent insecurity and restrictions.
Last week, the UN and partners mobilized rapid support for people who had lost their shelters or were displaced again due to attacks, domestic fires and other incidents.
More than a dozen reported incidents linked to attacks affected nearly 290 households, while two households were affected by domestic fires - a recurring danger in overcrowded shelters where families lack proper energy sources to cook their meals.
Another five households were affected by the placement of new yellow cement blocks, which often signal expanded areas where access is restricted and can trigger further displacement.
Most of the appeals for help last week came from northern Gaza and Deir al Balah, with teams tailoring response to meet families' specific needs.
Summer school
In other developments, as of last week more than 300,000 children in Gaza continued to participate in summer learning programmes supported by UN partners.
These organizations have also installed shade structures in 10 temporary learning spaces to address the extreme heat in the Strip.