World News in Brief: US-Iran war intensifies, aid for Myanmar, casualties in Ukraine
The US military struck rocket launchers on an island in the Strait of Hormuz over the weekend, days after US President Donald Trump announced that American forces had cleared all mines from the crucial trade route.
The US said the weekend strikes were aimed at preventing Iran from laying new mines.
After Iranian missiles launched towards Jordan in retaliation were intercepted, the US struck targets it claims were linked to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.
According to Iranian authorities, US strikes hit a wedding party in Kuhestak on Wednesday, killing at least four and injuring 68 more.
The US military said it is investigating the incident and that it never targets civilians.
The latest exchange marks a major escalation in the conflict that began in February, when the US and Israel launched military operations against Iran.
Condemnation from Guterres
UN Secretary-General António Guterres expressed grave concern over the escalation and reported rise in civilian casualties, including at the wedding party.
"The Secretary-General condemns all attacks against civilians," UN Spokesperson Stéphane Dujarric said.
"He recalls that all parties must respect their obligations under international humanitarian law, including the principles of distinction, proportionality and precautions."
Mr. Guterres strongly encouraged the US and Iran to return to diplomacy to avoid the "devastating consequences" further escalation would have on civilians across the Middle East.
UN launches aid transport service in Myanmar
The UN's World Food Programme (WFP) has launched an emergency cargo transport service to help humanitarian partners in Myanmar deliver lifesaving assistance to flood-stricken areas.
The logistics service - free for UN partners to use - is initially focusing on the towns of Lemyethna, Yegyi and Ngathaingchaung, which have been hit hard by floods in the past few months that have displaced thousands of families.
"When floodwaters isolate entire communities, logistics becomes the difference between success and failure of an operation," WFP Myanmar Country Director Michael Dunford said.
"Beyond delivering our own food assistance, WFP is serving as the logistics provider for the wider humanitarian response."
Collective effort
For at least two weeks, WFP will transport food and nutrition assistance; water, sanitation and hygiene supplies; medicines; and emergency shelter materials to civilians in hard-to-reach areas.
"By opening our transport lines to our partners, we can collectively ensure that food, medicine, and shelter materials swiftly and safely reach those who need them most," Mr. Dunford said.
WFP has also launched an emergency food response in Myanmar's Sagaing Region, which was hit especially hard by an earthquake earlier this year and already faces conflict, widespread restrictions to access and connectivity challenges.
The agency has already reached 15,000 people with emergency rations in the Ayeyarwady and Sagaing regions.
Russian attacks kill more civilians in Ukraine
Russian attacks on Ukraine between Tuesday and Wednesday morning killed at least 12 civilians and injured more than 65 others, causing casualties across six regions, according to the UN's humanitarian aid office (OCHA).
The attacks damaged homes, schools, a shopping centre and a postal hub. Strikes on energy facilities caused power outages in several regions.
Power generation equipment at a utility plant in Kherson was destroyed, raising fears that families unable to move to safer regions could lack heat and electricity in the coming winter.
"This escalation inflicts a devastating and growing toll on civilians by destroying livelihoods, worsening the psychological burden and disrupting daily life," said Matthias Schmale, the UN's humanitarian coordinator in Ukraine. "We must never normalise this."
Meanwhile, German officials have accused Russia of authorising an attempted explosive drone attack at Leipzig Airport on 4 August. Russian officials have denied any involvement.
Humanitarian facilities destroyed
A humanitarian warehouse contracted by the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) was destroyed in a Russian attack on 27 August in Chubynske, Kyiv region, destroying lifesaving supplies intended for children and families.
"This impedes the delivery of vital support to the most vulnerable, especially as another harsh winter approaches," UNICEF said.
In recent days, a missile strike also destroyed the humanitarian warehouses and vehicles of a UN-partnered NGO in Sumy, and another strike damaged an NGO-operated evacuation bus in Donetsk.
These attacks are part of a wider pattern of Russian strikes. At least six warehouses belonging to humanitarian organizations - including UN agencies, the Ukrainian Red Cross Society and NGOs - were impacted by Russian attacks in August.
"Our partners continue to provide medical and psychological aid, hot meals and shelter materials to support the humanitarian response," Mr. Dujarric said.