World News in Brief: Deadly Myanmar strikes as Malaysia begins deportations, new emergency funding released, Gaza and West Bank update
The UN chief on Tuesday strongly condemned an airstrike that reportedly killed at least 50 people at a market in Myanmar's Rakhine state and called for those responsible to be held to account.
Forces from the military junta reportedly hit Kyauktaw township around midday on Monday, when the market's more than 200 shops were busy with vendors, customers and transport workers
Women and children were among the dead and at least 58 people were injured, many critically. The toll is expected to rise.
UN human rights chief Volker Türk said the attack raised serious concerns about respect for international humanitarian law, describing Myanmar as a country "wracked by extreme violence".
He highlighted abuses against the Rohingya in particular by both the army and the opposition Arakan Army armed group.
Malaysia urged to stop deportations
The strike came hours before Malaysia began implementing a plan to deport some 5,000 Myanmar nationals.
The plan follows a reported agreement between Myanmar's military rulers and Kuala Lumpur, which Malaysia has said would involve only voluntary repatriations.
The UN refugee agency, UNHCR, says it has not been involved in identifying those being returned, who have reportedly been held in detention centres.
Mr. Türk urged the authorities to halt the process immediately, warning that conditions in Myanmar are "far from safe and sustainable".
The UN chief echoed that call over the reported return of some 1,500 people, with UNHCR stressing that no one should be sent back to a place where they risk persecution or torture, and that continuing violence in Rakhine shows conditions do not exist for safe, voluntary returns.
Fletcher unlocks funds ahead of El Niño-driven drought in Africa
UN relief chief Tom Fletcher has released millions of dollars from the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) to get ahead of the worst impacts of El Niño-driven drought in South Sudan, Zimbabwe and Chad.
In South Sudan, where more than two in every three people - over 10 million in total - already need aid, $6 million will support early action on a worsening drought that Mr. Fletcher warned is putting lives and livelihoods at risk.
The funds will help provide food, health, nutrition, protection, water and sanitation services.
In Zimbabwe, $4 million will be used for anticipatory action to get food, health and nutrition support in place before the drought arrives.
In Chad, $3.6 million will help 350,000 people prepare for dry conditions that could worsen food insecurity and undermine livelihoods.
Best laid plans
The funds were released automatically once trigger thresholds were met, bringing anticipatory action funding for the drought in seven different regions of Chad to $8 million since the start of the year.
The funds will complement the Chadian government's efforts and support early warning, cash assistance for vulnerable households, livestock feed, malnutrition screening and treatment, disease surveillance and the prevention and treatment of gender-based violence.
The UN has set up a Global Emergency Fund to help people in crises around the world. You can donate here.
Israeli fire near UN sites in Gaza as settler attacks continue in West Bank
Israeli fire was reported near UN facilities and humanitarian convoys in Gaza on several occasions in recent days, according to the UN humanitarian office (OCHA) on Tuesday.
No casualties have been reported, but the UN stressed that civilians - including aid workers and humanitarian operations - must always be protected.
Aid work continues. In the third week of September, protection partners gave around 13,000 Gazans mental health support, counselling and other services.
They also distributed around 740 food parcels, 6,000 adult diapers and 2,000 assistive devices including wheelchairs, as well as hygiene kits for more than 200 displaced families.
The UN agency for Palestine refugees, UNRWA, says 1,394 Palestinians have been killed since the faltering October 2025 ceasefire, citing local health authorities, and that some 94 per cent of the population need shelter assistance.
West Bank attacks
Settler attacks continue to undermine Palestinians' safety and livelihoods, OCHA says, adding to pressure on people to leave their homes. Several houses were damaged in the village of Jalud, in Nablus governorate, on Monday night.
Over the weekend in Tubas governorate, a water network serving Palestinians was vandalised and vehicles carrying water and produce were seized.
News reports said more than 100 settlers attacked Jalud, stopping the al-Tubasi family from returning to homes that settlers had seized weeks earlier.
The family was reportedly escorted by Israeli forces after Israel's High Court ruled earlier this month that they must be allowed back.
Two of their houses were set on fire and Israeli security forces were also targeted, according to news reports.
OCHA has recorded more than 1,600 settler attacks this year - an average of 6.7 a day, up from five a day in 2025 - and more than 4,300 Palestinians have been displaced.