Civilians bear the brunt, with deadly US strikes in Iran and thousands displaced in Yemen
Independent UN human rights investigators called for an immediate cessation of hostilities on Monday following a series of United States airstrikes on Iran in recent weeks that have killed civilians as tensions ripple through the region.
"These strikes are yet another devastating reminder of the human cost of the conflict between the United States and Israel and Iran," said Sara Hossain, chair of the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Iran.
Civilian deaths have been recorded since the first days of the US-Israeli attacks in February, including strikes on a school that killed over 160 children.
"Civilians must be protected at all times, and constant care must be taken to spare civilians and civilians objects from the effect of hostilities," she said.
Possible war crimes
Despite insisting that its military was not targeting civilians, US strikes hit a residential home on 30 July and a wedding celebration on 1 September, killing and injuring families, including women and children from marginalised minority communities, according to credible reports obtained by the mission.
Mission member Max du Plessis said "repeated airstrikes causing civilian casualties raise serious questions about whether all necessary measures are being taken to comply with States' obligations under international law, including to take all precautionary measures to avoid civilian deaths."
The mission urged all parties to the ongoing regional conflict to abide strictly by international law and cease hostilities, stressing that failure to do so may give rise to international responsibility, including for war crimes.
Calls for diplomacy, de-escalation
The mission stressed the vital importance of full and unfettered access for independent human rights monitors, journalists and investigators, including to secure critical evidence for the purposes of accountability.
The Human Rights Council-appointed investigators also reiterated their call for Member States to take immediate diplomatic action to halt the military conflict, de-escalate tensions and resume a credible, good faith dialogue on peace, human rights, justice and equal participation in political and public affairs.
The council established the fact-finding mission in 2022 to investigate alleged violations in Iran related to the protests and extended on 23 January 2026 for two years.
Learn more about the mission here.
Fighting displaces thousands in Yemen
At least 80,000 people were displaced by escalating fighting in Yemen in recent days, many forced to flee for the second or third time, according to the UN refugee agency, UNHCR.
"Civilians must be protected," UNHCR said in a social media post. "Humanitarian aid must reach those in need."
Millions in Yemen already need urgent assistance, but ongoing fighting between the Saudi-backed authorities and Iran-backed Houthi militia have recently escalated.
Media reports indicate that Houthis fighters have seized multiple islands in the Red Sea and a crucial Yemeni port city, giving them greater control over the Bab al-Mandab Strait, where they have been attacking Saudi shipping.
Deteriorating conditions
Meanwhile, conditions on the ground are worsening, the UN migration agency, IOM, warned over the weekend.
"The situation in Yemen is deteriorating quickly," IOM country director Abdusattor Esoev told UN News last Friday, adding that the agency is monitoring the situation and responding to urgent humanitarian needs.
Listen to the full interview here:
Despite extremely difficult operating conditions, humanitarian efforts continue to provide urgent aid, from food to shelter, according to the UN emergency relief agency, OCHA.
As of 12 September, they have provided aid to thousands of households, however supplies are critically low, and funding is falling short of needs, OCHA warned, emphasising that humanitarian access and movements remain severely constrained due to insecurity, with suspended operations in several locations on Yemen's west coast alongside impassable or restricted access to key roads.
'Toll on civilians is increasing'
At least 18,000 households - or 125,000 people - have been displaced since the start of the month, according to the latest OCHA updates.
"The toll on civilians is increasing," UN Deputy Spokesperson Farhan Haq said.
Between 1 September and Monday, the UN human rights office, OHCHR, has verified 40 civilian casualties - eight people killed and 32 others injured. Women and children account for half of those killed and more than half of those injured.
"OCHA once again calls on all parties to protect civilians, respect international humanitarian law and facilitate safe and unimpeded humanitarian access so that urgently needed assistance can reach communities in need," Mr. Haq said.