Guterres: Fast-tracking West Bank outposts is a 'flagrant violation' of international law
On Monday, UN Secretary-General António Guterres expressed deep concern over Israel's recent announcement of a series of measures in response to recent attacks.
These include accelerating the process to legalise farm outposts in the West Bank and establish new ones.
Settlements are illegal
The Secretary-General reiterated that all settlements, including outposts, have no legal validity and constitute a flagrant violation of international law.
Moreover, they remain a major obstacle to achieving the two-State solution between Israelis and Palestinians, and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace.
The UN humanitarian affairs office OCHA voiced alarm over the escalating violence across the West Bank in recent days.
Death, destruction and restrictions
Since Thursday, at least eight Palestinians - including a child - as well as two Israelis, have been killed and many others have been injured.
Homes, mosques, trees and agriculture structures have been set ablaze or otherwise vandalized and, in some cases, destroyed. At least 10 Palestinian families have been displaced.
"In parallel, Israeli forces have tightened their restrictions on Palestinian movements and access across many areas of the West Bank, preventing thousands of people from reaching essential services, such as emergency medical care and the sources of their livelihoods," OCHA said.
Since January, the agency has documented more than 1,330 incidents involving Israeli settlers that resulted in casualties, property damage or both.
As of Saturday, Israeli forces or settlers have killed 77 Palestinians this year, including 18 children. During the same period, three Israelis were killed by Palestinians.
Meanwhile, the UN and partners continue to call for the urgent protection of civilians and strict respect for both international humanitarian law and international human rights law, underscoring that perpetrators must be held to account.