It turns out Tyler Perry's Netflix series "Beauty in Black" will be back for Season 4 after all.
Netflix has announced that the show is returning for a fourth season despite the fact that a third and final season was announced in December 2025. That season does not yet have a release date at the time of this publishing.
"'Beauty in Black' is back for Season 4 and the Bellarie family's story is far from finished," Perry said. "There was so much more I wanted to explore and I'm grateful I get to keep telling this story. To the audience that has been on this ride with us from day one, thank you for watching and sharing it with the world. More episodes are on the way!"
Popular on Variety
"Beauty in Black" originally premiered in 2024. The show's two seasons to date have both been divided into two eight-episode batches each. It stars Taylor Polidore Williams, Crystle Stewart, Amber Reign Smith, Xavier Smalls, Ricco Ross, Julian Horton, Steven G. Norfleet, Richard Lawson, Terrell Carter, Bryan Tanaka, Charles Malik Whitfield, and Debbi Morgan.
The official logline for Season 3 states, "Kimmie (Polidore Williams) finally has a seat at the Bellarie table, but when a deadly family feud erupts, she's forced into an uneasy alliance with Mallory (Stewart). Together, they navigate a ruthless world of blackmail, revenge, and buried secrets as the family wages war against one of its own, threatening to bring the entire empire crashing down."
Additional cast members include: Bailey Tippen, Rodrigo Aburto, Randall J. Bacon, George Middlebrook, Greg Clarkson, Jasmine Burke, Aria Celeste Castillo, Gianmarco Duin, Philemon Chambers, Philip Boyd, Ty Anthony, Deeric Williams, Herb Magwood, Tre McBride, Kevin Savage, Jazmine Robinson, Kaja Brielle, Shay Mack, Steven Rho, Aaron Serotsky, Mikeal L Dwayne Griggs, Sara Spadacene, D'kia Anderson, Antoine Williams, Ty Courtad, Raven Chambers, Michael Butler, Jillmarie Lawrence, Jim Braswell
Perry is the creator, writer, executive producer, and director of "Beauty in Black." Angi Bones and Tony Strickland produce for Tyler Perry Studios, with music by Wow Jones & Jimijame$.