Dale Morris, one of the leading names in the ranks of Nashville music managers, who helped build up superstar careers for the group Alabama and then Kenny Chesney nearly from scratch, died Friday at 89. A representative said Morris died in his sleep.
"He lived a big, bold, beautiful, blessed life, and I'm holding onto that right now," said his protege and eventually managerial partner of many years, Clint Higham, president of Morris Higham Management. "It's the end of an era."
Morris met the fledgling Alabama in 1979 while heading up Dale Morris & Associates and played a massive role in making the group the most successful band in the history of country music, with 33 No. 1 hits in the 1980s and '90s, along with a huge touring career that led to their being named Entertainer of the Year three times by the Country Music Association and five times by the Academy of Country Music in the mid-'80s. Alabama's meteoric rise saw the group being credited for being early in country music to adopt some of rock's touring production values, finding rock-star-level success as well.
Popular on Variety
Lightning struck twice for Morris, as he oversaw the rise of Chesney from a country also-ran into the genre's most reliable stadium-filler, who was named Entertainer of the Year four times in the 2000s by both the CMAs and ACMs, and who has enjoyed 32 No. 1 Billboard country smashes.
Other artists Morris steered included Old Dominion, Ricky Van Shelton, Jerry Lee Lewis and his very first management client going back into the late '60s, Bobby "Crash" Craddock.
Said Higham, "He was larger than life, and never met a dream he couldn't build. Dale Morris gave me my first internship, and I never wanted to go anywhere else. He saw things in people, in me, in Kenny, and inspired everyone to reach beyond what we thought possible. Maybe it's how much he loved life, loved his family, loved us."
Chesney devoted significant passages in his 2025 book, "Heart Life Music," to describing his relationship with Morris, which came about from him being a huge fan of Alabama and discovering there was a man behind the scenes making it happen.
"By the time I came into Dale Morris's orbit, he'd been to the top of the mountain with Alabama and redefined what was possible in country music," Chesney wrote in his book, co-authored with Holly Gleason. "Alabama not only won all the awards, sold millions of albums, had iconic hit after iconic hit, they'd created a new mainstream country star who actually looked like their audience... Alabama was high energy, the drums were rock and roll; Jeff Cook played fancy guitars and Randy Owen's voice had this believability." Watching the band roll into town for a concert, as a fan, Chesney noticed "there had been a fifth person. A man with white hair, I figured might have been someone's father. Over time, I realized their manager had been the one to see around corners, didn't do business the way everyone else did, made a space for a band who'd shown up looking like their fans. He didn't care about anything but getting the music to the fans-and that was me, standing in a field, waiting for Alabama to arrive."
When Chesney finally got the chance to meet with Morris as an aspiring artist, he said, the manager "also asked hard questions, really digging in on what it took... 'How hard are you willing to work?' 'How far will you go when it's so hard and it's not happening?' I would have said anything to get Dale Morris to manage me...
"We talked about country music. Even more than Alabama, how songs and charisma were such a part of it, that spoke to country people," Chesney continued. "He told me his story. The similarities emerged. He was from South Carolina, another small Southern town with heart and people who all knew one another. He worked hard, to build a life, to create something more. He'd been a salesman, and he had that used car salesman thing where he could slap you on the back, be a good ole boy like your best friend.
"He loved music, made friends, some people thought he could be a manager. He started with Billy "Crash" Craddock, doing booking, picking up Jerry Lee Lewis. Successful, but he wanted something more. He'd seen a band in Myrtle Beach, who'd put out an independent record. They needed help. Dale applied himself. Once he and Alabama got going, they were in it together. When he realized arenas weren't paying country acts like the rock bands, he took his band to the fields. Literally, set up a stage, charged a fair price for the fans, and tripled their money. ...
"Classy, grateful, and humble, he knew how to make deals and close. I had a friend who called him 'Make a Deal Dale'," Chesney wrote. "He was raw, too. No airs, just unfiltered honesty about how rough it could be. He had relationships with everybody: labels, radio stations, big promoters, TV people, and publishers, but also the fair buyers, the country bar owners, the folks out in America who held careers together. We were gonna need them even more.
"I didn't bother meeting with another manager. Dale loved the game, and he loved coming up with new ways to do it. If I was willing to work as hard as I said, maybe I was the kid who'd let him do it all over again. He didn't believe in contracts. Didn't have one with Alabama, didn't need one with me. He said, 'Let's do it.'"
Before taking on management, Morris began his career as a songwriter, reaching the top 5 in 1967 with a cut by Johnny Paycheck, "Don't Monkey With Another Monkey's Monkey." He was inspired by that hit to move more into the business side, at first doing radio promo work for Little Darlin' Records, before he joined producer Ron Chancey in starting Cartwheel Records. Their success with Billy "Crash" Craddock led resulted in ABC purchasing the label, which spurred Morris to move on to exploring management, starting International House of Talent, where he both managed and booked Craddock.
It was a decade into his management career that he discovered Alabama, with an agency arm, Dale Morris & Associates, booking shows for the group and finding increasingly large venues that few country acts of the time were playing. As Alabama's shows grew, Morris realized other needs created by the group's growth and purchased Bob Seger's sound system in order to found Morris Leasing, which later became Morris Lighting + Sound.
In 2010, Morris was elected into the International Talent Buyers Association Hall of Fame.
He received the T.J. Martell Foundation's Tony Martell Lifetime Entertainment Achievement Award in 2014 (at which he is pictured holding his trophy alongside Chesney, at top).
Higham rose to become Morris' partner after starting as an intern. In 2018, the two of them sold their booking agency part of their company to Paradigm Talent Agency (now The-Team), while continuing to hold onto the management division.
In an interview with Pollstar that year, Morris said, "We've elected to stay small rather than to try to sign every act in the world. That way we were able to do what we were able to do and book and manage. Everybody seemed to be happy. We never signed contracts with any of the acts we represented. You come with us and if you want to leave us tomorrow, pay us what you owe us and out the door you go. That's been our policy for at least 45 years."
Morris was married to his wife, Earline, for 68 years. He was preceded in death by a son, Tim. Survivors include the couple's daughter-in-law, Jennifer, grandchildren Zack, Colton (and wife Mary Blair), Nick (and wife Shelby) and Kendall, and great grandchildren Mary Dee and Gus.
"We're so blessed to have had 90 years with him as the patriarch of our family," said Zack Morris. "Thank you to our music industry family and to his vast community of friends in Nashville, Boca and beyond for loving him all these many years."
A celebration of life is being planned for this fall, with details to be announced in the weeks ahead.