David Krumholtz, who played Kor-El in this year's "Supergirl" and appeared in "Oppenheimer" and "The Studio," said on Threads Monday that he's done with acting and ready to start a "new life."
However, he later deleted the posts that spoke of his frustration with getting jobs in Hollywood, leading fans to speculate whether he is truly ready to turn in his SAG/AFTRA card.
Krumholtz, who also starred in "Addams Family Values," wrote, "I kinda sorta put my acting career on hold the other day. It's been something I've been petrified to do for years. Specifically, the fear was that I'd go broke and not be able to handle being out of the game."
The post said he "sent the definitive email" that would put his career on hold for now. "A huge wave of relief washed over me. Not sure what I'm going to do for money instead, or how I'm going to do it, but I just removed a humongous burden, one that I truly didn't fathom the weight of until it was gone. Frustrated, fed up, fried," he wrote.
Popular on Variety
It's not the first time he has been ready to hang it up, however. Seth Rogen told a story on the "Diary of a CEO" podcast about how Krumholtz, a longtime friend, once told him he was going to quit acting and move to Riverside and start selling BMWs.
Krumholtz went on to add in his post, "It became clear to me this year, that if I were to continue fighting for parts (what I used to call 'auditioning'), I'd be doing so for roles that exploit my talent and reputation for a drastically diminishing return. Exploitative art isn't art. And artists deserve a fair pay percentage for work that assists their employers in making profits. I came up in a time where movie studios and TV networks, no matter how big, were still mom & pop store entities."
Reps for Krumholtz did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Credits for Krumholtz, who has appeared in more than 100 film and TV projects, include "10 Things I Hate About You," "Freaks and Geeks," "ER," "The Trouble with Normal," "The Santa Clause 2," "Harold & Kumar Go to White Castle," "Ray," "Tenacious D in the Pick of Destiny," "Superbad," "Walk Hard: The Dewey Cox Story," "Numb3rs," "Raising Hope," "Childrens Hostpital," "This Is the End," "Key and Peele," "The League," "The Good Wife," "The Deuce," "Springsteen: Deliver Me From Nowhere," "Forelock" and "The Rookie."