EARLIER: Paramount TV media chair George Cheeks, whose domain has included all of CBS in addition to the Paramount cable networks, is said to be in line for an expanded oversight at the newly merged Paramount-Warner Bros. entity (which will be named "Skydance," the company revealed Friday).
Popular on Variety
Skydance would not comment, but Cheeks has been seen as a strong lieutenant overseeing the TV properties under Paramount ever since Skydance took control of the company last August. Prior to that, Cheeks was one of the three co-CEOs of Paramount Global - and was the only one of that triumvirate to make the transition to the new company.
Speculation and rumors of how the structure on the TV network and studio side might play out have been heavy over the past few days, now that the question of how the streaming structure at the merged company has been settled (with HBO boss Casey Bloys on top and Paramount direct-to-consumer head Cindy Holland exiting).
Many of the questions in the more traditional Hollywood world of TV networks and studios - still a hefty revenue driver - have centered on what roles Skydance head David Ellison might have in mind for Warner Bros. TV Group and WBD U.S. Networks chairman/CEO Channing Dungey and Cheeks. Both execs are well-liked and respected, and both boast tremendous domains, consisting of both studios and networks.
One scenario making the rounds has Cheeks potentially overseeing all of the vast TV holdings of the combined company, but so far, there's no firm confirmation and a final structure isn't expected to be announced until next week.
All eyes will also be on what role Ellison picks for Dungey, whose tenure at Warner Bros. TV Group continues to be extremely successful. Under Dungey, the studio produces more than 80 original series for more than 20 platforms, including HBO, HBO Max and others, with series like "Ted Lasso," "Abbott Elementary", "The Bachelor" franchise, "Georgie & Mandy's First Marriage," "The Jennifer Hudson Show," "The Pitt," "Running Point," "Shrinking," "Rooster," "The Voice" and the upcoming "Harry Potter" series. So far this year, the division has landed 13 new series orders and 13 series renewals, while "The Pitt" just landed six Emmys - including its second for outstanding drama.
Dungey also took on oversight of WBD's U.S. Networks in 2025, including Discovery Channel, Food Network, HGTV, Investigation Discovery, TLC, Adult Swim, Animal Planet, Cartoon Network, Cooking Channel, HLN, OWN, Science Channel, TBS, TNT, Travel Channel, Tru TV and Turner Classic Movies.
When Variety spoke to Dungey last month, she said she had met with Ellison in more of a "getting to know you" setting. Beyond that, she expressed her desire to stick with the company post-merger: "I love my team at Warner Bros. Television Group. I love our shows, our talent. And I've become very happy in my U.S. networks role, which was something that I didn't see coming almost two years ago. The best-case scenario for me is something that allows me to continue to play around in both of these spaces."
Among the possible setups that observers have spitballed was the idea of splitting their oversight between networks and studios. But if Cheeks does take control of the entire TV business, the biggest question will be whether Dungey will opt to remain and report to him. Insiders say the two have a good rapport, particularly as Warner Bros. TV has been a hefty supplier of series to CBS over the years - including the successful crop of Chuck Lorre comedies that have aired on the Eye.
Beyond that, the question also remains as to how Warner Bros. TV (run by president Brett Paul and creative affairs president Clancy Collins White), CBS Studios (run by president David Stapf), and Paramount TV Studios (run by Matt Thunell) will all be integrated.
CBS Studios is also a major enterprise, producing more than 60 series, while Paramount TV Studios has a hefty slate including the Taylor Sheridan shows.
Currently, Stapf and Thunell report to Cheeks, while Paul and Collins White report to Dungey. There could be a scenario where Warner Bros. TV, CBS Studios and Paramount TV Studios continue as separate labels.
Cheeks had previously been president and CEO of CBS, having joined Paramount in March 2020. This repped his second stint there, having first joined MTV Networks (a part of the then-Viacom company) in 1998 and later taking on roles including exec VP of business affairs and general counsel for the Viacom Music and Entertainment Groups.
Cheeks later moved to NBC in 2012 as president of business operations and late-night programming, then became co-chairman of NBC Entertainment and later as vice chairman of NBCUniversal Content Studios.
Deadline was first to report of Cheeks' potential new role at Skydance.