"The Rivals of Amziah King," "Butterfly" and "Pressure" walked away with prizes at the 54th Norwegian International Film Festival Haugesund.
The Matthew McConaughey starrer was awarded the Ray of Sunshine Award, given to the film that "excites and spreads the most joy" - much needed as the ceremony took place amid news of Norwegian King Harald's deteriorating health.
The jurors praised the film for its "humor and warmth." "It's poetic and beautiful, but also a wild ride. There were times when it shocked us, times when it made us want to get up and dance, and times when it made us want to call our loved ones. The film is a reminder that life is fragile and that we have limited time with the people closest to us," they said in a statement.
Popular on Variety
They also gave a special mention to the "inspired editing, which brings an extra spark of life to the film."
Itonje Søimer Guttormsen's "Butterfly" with Renate Reinsve picked up the Norwegian Critics' Award for being "both immensely entertaining and deeply moving."
"With striking visual flair, it explores a powerful sense of place and landscape, as well as the complexities of human relationships. The performances are equally compelling, allowing each actor to reveal the full breadth of their range," said the jurors.
In her interview with Variety, Reinsve said she enjoyed being on set that felt like "a mix between a fictional movie and a documentary." Mostly because of the non-professional actors who had a real connection to the places where they filmed.
"I love filmmakers who try to challenge the established," she noted. "Itonje's ideas come from somewhere else. It's so unconventional and I really admire that. Hopefully, I'll keep on working and learning from directors with different tastes and different ways of making movies."
The Audience Award went to World War II drama "Pressure."
Directed by Anthony Maras, it follows General Dwight D. Eisenhower as he plans the Normandy landings. However, he must listen to Group Captain James Stagg, a meteorologist, before making his move.
"Even though we all knew the outcome of the event, the film successfully builds tension throughout," said the jurors. Brendan Fraser and Adrew Scott play the leads.
"The film depicts a man under unbelievable pressure in an incredibly difficult situation and [emphasizes] the importance of standing by one's convictions and beliefs, even when everyone around you wants you to do otherwise."
They added: "Making a weather report this intimidating and riveting is an accomplishment in itself. Watching the weather forecast will never be the same after seeing this film."
On the industry side, "Grandmonster" won the Best Pitch Award for tackling the universal subject of aging - and adding a "generous dose of cheeky humor, horror, and, apparently, zombies with dentures," said jurors Annick Mahnert, Soňa Morgenthalová, Iris Cadoux and Kalle Løchen.
The project - selected for the Nordic Co-Production Market - sees an American dropout who tries to save her grandmother from dementia and accidentally triggers a zombie outbreak at a Norwegian nursing home. It will be directed by Vegard Dahle and produced by Jon Vatne for Syden Pictures.
"Both the director and producer were completely at ease during their presentation. They made us laugh, they moved us and, most importantly, they convinced us that silliness and horror can travel remarkably well across borders. We left the pitch confident that this team has the energy, the humor, and the creative spark to bring that same spirit to the film."
Finnish project "Elektra," directed by Elisa Kujala and produced by Dionysos Films, Ea Johanne Sandberg and Alpha Nord's "Anathema" and "Groupies" by Clara Vida also earned recognition.
There was another notable star present at the festival: Draken Harald Hårfagre, described as "the world's largest Viking ship sailing in modern times" and prominently featured in the smash hit "The Odyssey."
Draken's international crew worked aboard during filming as well.
"Christopher Nolan came to see the ship, and he fell in love with it. And so we went down with the ship to Greece," recalled its captain Björn Ahlander.
"[For the film], we took away all the modern items, including the tent. Our crew had three small boats to train the extras. Then one day, Christopher Nolan came to me and said: 'Björn, we will take your crew.' Suddenly, we were dressed in costumes and rowing alongside them."
It was an "adventure" for the crew, he said.
"It was challenging to row in different weather conditions and so close to the land, but we did it - over and over again."
"So many people want to come aboard these days. There's so much excitement, and I remember years when no one was interested," he recalled.
"Now, we have a lot of volunteers coming from all over the world, and after a week, it's hard to tell the difference between them and the professional crew. We're not a military ship, but you need discipline to coordinate everything on board."
"Also, because everything here can kill you," he joked.
Launched in 2012, the ship was built in Norway using traditional methods. It was developed as a reconstruction of the ships described in the Norse sagas.
Crewmember Dinnie Jay added: "At 35 meters long, she's bigger than anything found in archeological digs, but that size comes directly from the sagas."
"I remember seeing it and thinking: 'Someday I am going to sail on this ship.' Most of the crew is volunteer; we have other jobs. I work as a rigger [at the National Museum of the Royal Navy in Portsmouth]. But many of us come from a background in traditional sailing. There aren't many replicas out there, so it's really pretty exciting."
Looking at the ship, she said: "She's pretty spectacular."
"It's such an iconic representation of a different era."
Here's the list of awards:
The Ray of Sunshine Award
"The Rivals of Amziah King" directed by Andrew Patterson
The Audience Award
"Pressure" directed by Anthony Maras
The Norwegian Critics' Award
"Butterfly" directed by Itonje Søimer Guttormsen.
Best Pitch Award
"Grandmonster" directed by Vegard Dahle
Midpoint Talent Award
"Elektra" directed by Elisa Kujala
Storyline Production Award
"Anathema" directed by Ea Johanne Sandberg and Alpha Nord
Next Nordic Generation Award
"Groupies" directed by Clara Vida from The Norwegian Film School at the University of Inland.
Honorable Mention
"Sister of Mine" directed by André Vaara