France TV Distribution has picked up "The Story of Marceau Miller," a new series based on the international bestseller by Marceau Miller - a pseudonymous author who may or may not be the man at the center of the acclaimed suspense novel, according to U.S. publisher Blackstone.
Originally published as "Le roman de Marceau Miller" by Éditions de La Martinière in 2025, the novel generated worldwide enthusiasm even before its release in France, triggering bidding wars at the Frankfurt Book Fair in 2024.
The four-part series chronicles the events following the sudden death of best-selling thriller writer Marceau Miller while climbing in the French Alps overlooking Lake Geneva - a calamity that brings to light a past that everyone thought was buried.
Popular on Variety
In the wake of the tragedy, Marceau's wife, Sarah, discovers the existence of a manuscript carefully hidden away by the author. Recounting the disappearance of his sister Jade 20 years earlier, this text threatens to expose the lies, secrets and rifts within a group of friends bound forever by tragic events. For Sarah, a harrowing quest for the truth begins, shattering the image of the man she thought she knew.
Produced by Gaumont Télévision for France Télévisions and distributed worldwide by France TV Distribution, "The Story of Marceau Miller" will be launched at the upcoming Mipcom TV market in Cannes, which runs Oct. 12-15.
"From the moment we read the novel, it was clear to us that it had all the material for a series: a highly addictive investigation, secrets gradually coming to light, a group of friends bound by 20 years of shared history, and above all, tremendous emotional depth," Gaumont producer Aurélie Iniesta told Variety.
"The Story of Marceau Miller is an extremely gripping thriller, but it is also deeply emotionally powerful, with the investigation led by our heroine, Sarah, serving as the common thread: into her husband's death, the disappearance of her closest friend 20 years earlier, and the group of friends who have been bound together forever. Beneath the suspense and the twists, it is also a deeply moving story about love, friendship, grief, and loyalty.
"We wanted to put people and human emotion front and center, without giving up the pleasures of the thriller genre, the thrill of revelations, or the spectacular, sun-drenched quality of our settings," Iniesta added. "The series is also driven by very strong female characters, while giving the male characters real complexity and great sensitivity."
The veiled identity of the author appears to have contributed to the appeal of the novel and, as a credited writer on the series, could also prove a selling point for the show.
"The mystery surrounding Marceau Miller is, of course, part of what makes both the literary phenomenon and our series so unique," Iniesta noted.
"Marceau Miller was involved in writing the adaptation of his own novel and brought to it his deeply intimate knowledge of this world and its characters. But he was also fully aware that adapting a novel into a series necessarily means partly reinventing it. He therefore gave the writers and [director] David Hourrègue real freedom to make the characters and the universe their own, and to make the narrative and directorial choices they felt were the most appropriate."
"Our ambition was not to translate the book literally to the screen, but to remain faithful to what gives it its strength and singularity, while creating a series with its own identity - a thriller capable of captivating a very wide audience, but above all of moving them emotionally."
Julia Schulte, senior VP of international sales at France TV Distribution, is eager to present the series to global audiences.
"We are proud to introduce and promote the premium thriller 'The Story of Marceau Miller' at Mipcom for the first time to international partners," Schulte said. "Produced by renowned French studio Gaumont, the series is a brilliant adaptation of the French novel by the enigmatic author Marceau Miller, which became a true literary phenomenon.
"With bestselling editions published in more than 15 territories, including Germany, Italy, Korea, and the United States, and a second volume released a few months ago, the story is already reaching audiences around the world, giving the series strong international appeal for both mainstream TV and non-linear platforms."
"The Story of Marceau Miller" is directed by David Hourrègue ("Désenchantées," "Rivages") from a screenplay by Marceau Miller, Vinciane Mokry, William Willebrod Wegimont and Justine Kim Gautier.
The series stars Elisa Erka, Thierry Godard, Capucine Malarre, Fleur Geffrier, Amaury De Crayencour, Oscar Copp, Marc Arnaud and Steve Tientcheu.