Marco Bassetti, CEO of Banijay Entertainment, Anna Marsh, deputy CEO of Canal+, CEO of Studiocanal and chief content officer of Canal+, Jane Tranter, CEO of Bad Wolf, and director Edward Berger, best known for "All Quiet on the Western Front," will be among the speakers attending Rome film and TV market MIA.
The event, which is backed by ANICA (the Italian Association of Film, Audiovisual and Digital Industries) and APA (the Italian Audiovisual Producers Association), runs Oct. 19-23. It is led by Gaia Tridente.
Other speakers include Raj Singh, CEO of Media Capital Technologies - MCT, a leading figure in the international media and entertainment financing and investment landscape. He is among the guests of the European Investment Hub, a new platform dedicated to "exploring all financial tools supporting the audiovisual industry in Europe and internationally," MIA said.
Popular on Variety
MIA has unveiled a new format, which will transform the Via Veneto and Piazza Barberini into "an urban district dedicated to the international film and audiovisual industry, encouraging the cross-over between creativity, industry, finance and innovation," it said.
Palazzo Barberini will once again serve as MIA's headquarters. The historic location will host the main conferences as well as the European Investment Hub, which will bring European public and private funds, banks, investors and international operators to Rome.
As part of that program, ANICA will present a study on the evolution of film consumption, and APA will present its annual report on the Italian audiovisual industry.
The Hotel Westin Excelsior, overlooking Via Veneto, joins the official MIA circuit for the first time. It will host pitching forums, showcases, panels and presentations dedicated to film and series, as well as professional meetings and networking activities for sales and buyers.
The InterContinental Rome Ambasciatori Palace, on Via Veneto, will host the new documentary hub, with a dedicated conference room, spaces for pitching and showcases, and a lounge for meetings and networking.
The Hotel Sina Bernini Bristol, on Piazza Barberini, will be a home for the animation sector. It will host new programs dedicated to animated series, including Animation Next and the new gap financing tool, as well as specialist conferences, professional meetings and B2B sessions.
The hotel will also be the venue for certain closed-door activities of the market. It will host strategic meetings of MIA's international partners, as well as the European Investment Hub's advisory, matchmaking and one-to-one meetings.
The Grand Hotel Palace will be dedicated to closed-door business meetings, training programs, private pitching sessions and discussion between international partners and professionals.
Among MIA's new satellite venues is Spaces Via Veneto, which will host activities dedicated to talent development, the promotion of intellectual property and professional training, including Unbox activities - a project addressed to emerging filmmakers who, after shooting their short films, aspire to make a feature debut and series. It is produced in partnership with Alice nella Città.
W Rome joins MIA's hotel partners and will host Casa Mia, a meeting point for the market's international community beyond the official program. Every day, from 6 PM to 8 PM, it will host networking events.
MIA is organized with the support of Italy's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, and ICE (an agency for the promotion abroad and internationalization of Italian companies). It also receives contributions from Creative Europe MEDIA and the Italian Ministry of Culture, and support from the Rome Lazio Film Commission Foundation and the Lazio Region.