Howard Stern is coming to HBO Max.
HBO Max inked a deal with Stern's production company and SiriusXM to release weekly filmed episodes of "The Howard Stern Show," an adapted version of his radio show that has scaled back to one show per week. The series will debut on HBO Max worldwide on Thursday, Sept. 17, at 12:01 a.m. PT/3:01 a.m. ET, with new episodes releasing subsequent Thursdays. The series is executive produced by The Howard Stern Production Co. Inc.
"Howard Stern has always been in a category of his own with an unmistakable, unique take on the world," Casey Bloys, chairman and CEO, HBO and HBO Max content, said in a statement. "Howard has changed radio and media at large with his ability to draw the most out of his guests and cultivate a following like no other. We couldn't be happier to welcome Howard to HBO Max and to partner with SiriusXM to bring 'The Howard Stern Show' to the platform."
Popular on Variety
Stern said in a statement, "As the 'King of All Media,' I am honored to bring my SiriusXM show to HBO Max, and through HBO Max to worldwide distribution. For years, my SiriusXM show has offered only brief video peeks. HBO convinced me to pull back the curtain and let the world watch; the amazing celebrities and musicians who drop by, our staff antics, and my conversations with Robin. Bringing my latest SiriusXM shows to HBO Max's millions of viewers, every week, is a career highlight, and I'm thrilled to be joining the ranks of such prestigious television."
After rumors swirled last year that Stern, now 72, would be retiring, in December he announced a three-year deal renewal with SiriusXM.
The next season of "The Howard Stern Show" on SiriusXM will debut Sept. 14, with new shows airing every Monday.
Additionally, on Sept. 14, Stern will unveil a new lineup for his long-time SiriusXM channel Howard 100, including "Wrap Up Wednesday," an expanded version of his "Wrap Up Show" hosted by Gary Dell'Abate and Jon Hein, plus new ways to listen to his multi-decade library of past shows. The Howard Stern section of the SiriusXM app is expanding to include "Howard Stern Decades" for access to his content from (or about) the 1980s, '90s, 2000s and '10s.
"There's simply no one like Howard, and the start of his new season is another exciting chapter in an extraordinary run," said Scott Greenstein, SiriusXM's president and chief content officer. "For more than two decades at SiriusXM, he's continued to evolve, surprise audiences and deliver the kind of conversations and moments that only Howard can. We are proud that Howard chose to continue with SiriusXM through 2028 for his exclusive live show and deep library of classic Howard, and that Howard, HBO Max and SiriusXM have now teamed up to create a compelling new video version of his show."