The 2026 FIFA World Cup has smashed ratings records in the U.S. and around the world, owing to its unique mix of star power - Lionel Messi, Cristiano Ronaldo and Neymar performing in perhaps their final World Cup matches, joined by younger stars Kylian Mbappe, Erling Haaland and Lamine Yamal - a North American setting and a bevy of certified studs. And speaking of star power, Tom Cruise, one of Hollywood's last movie stars, has an Oscar-courting movie coming out in the fall, "Digger," that he's been promoting the heck out of. So naturally, the two would merge their audiences, first with "Digger" airing a number of special TV spots during World Cup matches, and then Cruise making a special appearance during Sunday's World Cup final between Spain and defending champions Argentina at New Jersey's MetLife Stadium (temporarily renamed the New York New Jersey Stadium just for the World Cup).
After hanging with "Sesame Street's" Elmo and Cookie Monster prior to the match, the "Mission: Impossible" and "Top Gun" star delivered an inspirational speech opening the World Cup final, where he proclaimed, "So, as we gather for one final chapter, let us celebrate a tournament that brought the world together. Let us celebrate each other. This is football. This is unity. This is greatness." A number of other celebrities were in attendance at the final, including President Donald Trump (who was showered with boos) and first lady Melania, Beyoncé and Jay-Z, "The Odyssey" star Matt Damon and his wife Luciana, Timothée Chalamet and his girlfriend Kylie Jenner, David and Victoria Beckham, Serena Williams, Mick Jagger, Dua Lipa, Olivia Rodrigo, Javier Bardem and Penélope Cruz, the Muppets, Will Ferrell, Tom Brady, Kevin Hart, Martha Stewart, Victor Wembanyama, Post Malone, Pharrell Williams (who announcers misidentified as A$AP Rocky), Julia Garner, Trevor Noah, Anya Taylor-Joy (sporting an Argentina scarf, since she's part-Argentinian), two-time Oscar winner Adrien Brody and more.
Popular on Variety
And then came the halftime show.
Curated by Coldplay's Chris Martin, the World Cup's first-ever official halftime show was co-headlined by BTS, Justin Bieber, Madonna and Shakira, highlighting the competition's mostly American backdrop and its international scope. With the match scoreless at the half, the crowds in attendance and watching on TV needed an adrenaline boost, and the medley of musical acts was more than eager to provide one.
Oh, and there was Jason Sudeikis, who popped out as his Ted Lasso character to introduce Justin Bieber, urging him to "make us proud" while posing in front of a "BELIEBE" sign.
To say that the event was star-studded would be a vast understatement. The 2026 FIFA World Cup final was the hottest ticket since Game 4 of the NBA Finals, attracting celebrities from all over the world to... New Jersey.