In a move mirroring European indie producers' look out for strong partners in an unstable market, Helsinki-filmi ("Tom of Finland," "The Summer Book," "Codename: Annika"), one of the biggest content creators in Finland, and Glassriver ("As Long as I Live," Black Sands"), one of the leading players in Iceland, have come together to co-produce a slate of films and series.
Kickstarting the initial three-title partnership is the Finnish crime show "Tango Metal" ("Rautamurhat"), to be pitched on Thursday at the Helsinki Intl. Film Festival's industry sidebar Finnish Film Affair.
Based on an idea by showrunner Mia Ylönen, Helsinki-filmi's head of drama credited for SkyShowtime's "Codename: Annika," the six parter reunites Ylönen with writer Tua Harno ("North 66 Precinct," "Guts") and AFI, NFTS graduate Jojo Erholtz ("Detective Mario Kallio," "Living With My Ex"), both attached as well to Helsinki-filmi's upcoming series "Dead Women Talking."
Popular on Variety
The story turns on Finnish crime reporter and tango enthusiast Paula (38), sent to Reykjavik to investigate the ritualistic murder of her estranged brother. In her search for the truth, Paula is joined by detective Bjarki Haraldsson (35), her polar opposite. While the Finn's life is at a standstill following the accidental death of her husband, the sunny Bjarki is a father, crime detective by day and metal band frontman at night. The investigation draws them close to each other, until the killer comes after them.
"Basically, Paula has lost everything, while Bjarki has seemingly everything. I wanted to oppose these characters and see how their worlds collide," said Ylönen, who used to cover Heavy Metal gigs as a journalist.
The producing partners are currently in advanced negotiations with commissioners in Finland and Iceland, with the show in development and scheduled to start production later this year.
Ylönen, who approached Glassriver with the project, said tangoing with them on this series and other scripted content "makes total sense.""They have an impressive track record, especially in crime, thriller series such as 'Black Sands,' 'Cold Haven,' and are very active in international co-productions, which is where we're venturing into for our series. Financing is in decline in Europe. We have to stand on our own feet and be clever with financing," said the former TV news reporter turned writer, showrunner and executive producer.
Ylönen also pointed at shared mindsets between the two Nordic nations. "We both come from small nations; we have a dark sense of humor and rely on trust. This is something that has been evident since we started working on this project."
Glassriver CEO, producer Andri Ómarsson, concurred with her. "In Iceland, we're on the outskirts of the Nordics and Europe. Today, all countries realize that international partnerships are critical to get a project off the ground. It makes sense on a creative and business standpoint to collaborate with Finland," said the seasoned TV executive, who also underscored broadcasters' and streamers' flexi mindsets and shift towards co-commissioning.
"We did 'Cold Haven' as a co-commissioning between Síminn [Iceland's leading streamer] and RTP in Portugal. That was Síminn's first co-commissioning on a high-end show, and they got really excited about it," said Ómarsson.
Other upcoming projects to be co-produced by Helsinki-filmi and Glassriver include a Finnish near-sci-fi adventure feature, and an Icelandic TV project based on an original story, to be majority shot in Iceland. Details will be announced when key financing is locked.
Currently on Glassriver's active slate are Síminn's crime series "Elma," based on Eva BjörgÆgisdóttir's best-selling book series, set to premiere next month. The co-production with Belgium's Lunamine is repped globally by Mediawan, with a pre-sale to Finland's MTV in place.
Also on Síminn's list and set for a spring 2027 premiere is the climate disaster series "Avalanche," co-produced with Finland's Whatevergroup, currently in post in Finland. The prolific Erholtz is attached as editor.
Meanwhile, soon to start lensing in Tenerife is the comedy drama "Hot Stuff," ordered by Iceland's Channel 2 and co-produced with Romania's IDEA Film.
On Helsinki-filmi's slate is the Yle crime series "Dead Women Talking," backed by the Nordic 12 pubcasters alliance. "That's our biggest international co-production since "Codename: Annika," stated Ylönen about the series currently lensing, which will have a podcast spinoff.
Then on the feature film front, Helsinki-filmi's "Tell Everyone" by Alli Haapasalo (audience prize winner at Sundance 2022 for "Girl Picture") is due to open domestically Oct. 9. The film bagged last year's Finnish Film Affair best project award.