12 days before its grand opening, Cartoon Forum, Europe's main co-production forum for animated TV series, has unveiled its 2026 Tribute nominees.
Presented for the first time in 2006, these awards have since become a prestigious recognition in the European animation industry. The Tributes celebrate the dedication and creativity of key players in the sector throughout the previous year. The prizes are awarded at Cartoon Forum, after a series of votes by the 2026 attendees (from around 40 countries). Last year, Danish broadcaster DR, Mediatoon Distribution and Belgian producer Creative Conspiracy took top honors for their eminent contributions to the sector and landmark productions.
This year, 10 companies from seven countries are competing in the Tributes' three established categories: Broadcaster, Investor/Distributor and Producer of the Year.
Popular on Variety
Producer of the Year nominees come from four European countries: Bionaut (Czech Republic), Bobby Prod (France), Mago Production (Spain) and Melusine Studio (Luxembourg). Their profiles range from established producers to studios focused on international co-production, independent European production and creative partnerships. All four have a track record at Cartoon Forum and are involved in current or recent projects presented at the event.
Founded in 1999, Bionaut's animation activities have been developing since 2015. Its Cartoon Forum track includes "9 Million Colors," "Hungry Bear Tales" and "Animalies." This year, Bionaut returns as co-producer of "Scope of the Universe," a Norwegian project by Løv Film.
Bobby Prod, the French boutique studio behind Cannes' hit "Jim Queen," also presented "The Broos" at Cartoon Forum 2024. The series, which originated on TikTok and Instagram and was later developed as an animated series in co-production with Arte France, is an example on how digital-first storytelling can reach new audiences.
Mago Production, a Barcelona-based animation company with extensive experience in 2D and 3D animated series, documentaries and films, also presented several projects at Cartoon Forum, including "Polinopolis," "Limbo Ville" among others, and returns this year with "Lily & Kyle."
Luxemburgish Melusine productions returns to Cartoon Forum with two co-productions, "Mebh and the Wolf Pups" and "The Otherness."
The French companies Folivari International ("Samuel," "Pil's Adventures") and Mediawan Kids & Family ("Ki & Hi," "Witch Detectives"), together with Germany's Studio 100 International ("Maya and the Bee," "Louca"), make up the three nominees in the Investor/Distributor category.
The Broadcaster category brings together three public-service broadcasters from across Europe: BBC ("Dungeon & Kittens," "Duck & Frog"), Sweden's SVT (Sveriges Television, "Team Nuggets," "Tree & Bee") and Südwestrundfunk ("Sir Mouse," "The Jungle Bunch").
2026 also marks the addition of a fourth category, the Ecoprod-Cartoon Tribute, being introduced in this edition to recognize a European animation production company or initiative that has made a significant contribution to advancing sustainability in the sector. The award is organised in partnership with Ecoprod, a French non-profit organisation supporting the audiovisual industry's environmental transition through collaboration and practical solutions.
The three nominees selected by Ecoprod for the inaugural Ecoprod-Cartoon Tribute come from two countries: Gao Shan Pictures ("The Smurfs," "In Waves") and La Cabane Productions ("Wolf's Dinner," "Luce and the Rock") from France, and Cartoon Saloon ("Wolfwalkers," "Natu Natu") from Ireland.
Created in 1990 to boost the co-production and distribution of European animation across television and new media platforms, Cartoon Forum has helped 1,053 animation series obtain financing totalling more than $4.43 billion. Cartoon Forum 2026 takes place in Toulouse over September 14-17.