If you purchase an independently reviewed product or service through a link on our website, Variety may receive an affiliate commission.
The new season is finally here! The 2026-2027 NCAA College Football season officially kicks off with its first big weekend of games starting on Saturday, Aug. 23.
Starting on Saturday, Aug. 29, The first game of the season is North Carolina Tar Heels vs. TCU Horned Frogs at Aviva Stadium in Dublin, Ireland, with a start time of 12 p.m. ET/9 a.m. PT on ESPN.
Throughout the season, games broadcast live across ABC, ACC Network, Big Ten Network, CBS, CBS Sports Network, The CW, ESPN, ESPN2, ESPNU, FOX, FS1, FS2, NBC, SEC Network, TBS, TNT and truTV, as well as livestreams on ESPN Unlimited, Paramount+, FOX One, Peacock and HBO Max.
Luckily, even without cable, you don't have to miss any of the action. You can access games on NBC, ABC, CBS and FOX with affordable cable antennas, while college football games are also available to stream online on a variety of platforms, such as Sling TV and Hulu + Live TV. However, the best ways for cord-cutters to tune into the action is with DirecTV.
With the start of a new season, it's likely matches may features a few of celebrities in attendance to support their favorite college teams, like Texas Longhorns-alum Matthew McConaughey, USC Trojans-fan Will Ferrell, Kansas State-grad Eric Stonestreet, Tennessee Volunteers-fan Kenny Chesney and others.
Meanwhile, with the popularity of college sports, especially football, it's likely that games are going to be big ratings draws for networks. Programming like Sunday Night College Football on ABC: Miami vs. Notre Dame was a big hit in 2025 with more than 10 million viewers watching the game.
How to Watch the 2026-2027 NCAA College Football Season Online
Save up to $30 on signature packages with DirecTV. Priced at $59.99/month for the first month of service ($89.99/month afterwards), you get access to the streaming service's "Entertainment" package for college football on ABC, ACC Network, Big Ten Network, CBS, CBS Sports Network, The CW, ESPN, ESPN2, ESPNU, FOX, FS1, FS2, NBC, SEC Network, TBS, TNT and truTV, along with over 90 local, broadcast and cable channels. The streamer comes with unlimited cloud DVR for recording programming, as well as an additional 105 channels from DirecTV's "MyFree" networks.
Sling TV is one of the best options for affordable live streaming with the Sling Orange + Blue package starting at $69.99/month. The package includes ABC, The CW, ESPN, ESPN2, FOX, FS1, NBC, TBS, TNT and truTV, as well as more than 50 other channels. For Big Ten Network, ESPNU, FS2, SEC Network and ACC Network are available with the Sling Sports Extra add-on for an additional $11/month. Plans also include 50 hours of cloud DVR for recording programming and a library of free-to-watch on-demand movies and TV shows. Unfortunately, Sling TV doesn't include CBS and CBS Sports.
Fubo is one of the best options for streaming college football games live. The service features ABC, ACC Network, Big Ten Network, CBS, CBS Sports Network, The CW, ESPN, ESPN2, ESPNU, FOX, FS1, FS2, NBC and SEC Network for college football games. It even has more than 220 live TV channels for cable-free streaming and an unlimited cloud DVR. Watch the event with Fubo's five-day free trial. You can even stream on up to two devices at the same time. Unfortunately, Fubo doesn't include TNT, TBS and truTV.
For great streaming option for to watch college football, check out Hulu + Live TV for live channel streaming with access to ABC, ACC Network, Big Ten Network, CBS, CBS Sports Network, The CW, ESPN, ESPN2, ESPNU, FOX, FS1, FS2, NBC, SEC Network, TBS, TNT and truTV. Starting at $89.99/month, the streaming service has more than 100 other channels, as well as access to hit originals on Disney+, Hulu and ESPN Unlimited.
Get an ESPN Unlimited subscription here for $29.99/month, which will get you instant access to the livestream online. Unlike pay-per-view events, select NCAA College Football games are available to stream online free for ESPN Unlimited subscribers.
For new subscribers, ESPN Unlimited bundle comes with Disney+ and Hulu for $35.99/month. The bundle comes with ESPN Unlimited, as well as Disney+ and Hulu for free when you purchase access to the livestream feed.
However, the streaming service doesn't come with a free trial, but there's a clever workaround, if you want to watch ESPN Unlimited for free. Learn more about how to watch online for free here.
ESPN Unlimited features everything that ESPN has to offer, including access to all of its networks and streaming service, like ESPN, ESPN2, ESPN3, ESPN on ABC, ESPNU, ESPNEWS, ESPN Deportes, SEC Network, ACC Network and ESPN+. It's the ideal streamer for sports fans who want it all.
For new subscribers, Paramount+ starts at $8.99/month to access NCAA College Football on CBS and CBS Sports.
If you're looking to livestream games, there is a clever workaround to get Paramount+ for cheap since the streamer doesn't offer a free trial. Right now, you can sign up for a 30-day trial for Walmart+ for just $1. The retailer's rewards program comes with Paramount+ as one of its perks.
Aside from streaming access to select college football games, you can take advantage of everything Walmart+ has to offer with perks such as free and fast delivery; fuel discounts at Walmart, Sam's Club, Exxon, Mobil and Murphy stations; Burger King deals; additional savings with early access deals and many other perks. Learn more about what Walmart+ can offer you here.
FOX has its own streaming service called FOX One, which features every network under the FOX umbrella, including FOX News, FOX Weather, FOX Nation, FOX Business, FOX Sports, FS2, Big Ten Network, FOX Deportes, FOX Network and your local FOX station. FOX One starts at $19.99/month ($199.99/year), or you can signup with the service as a channel add-on for Prime Video. In fact, go with Prime Video and get a three-day free trial just for signing up.
Please note: You have to be a subscriber to Prime Video to get FOX One as an add-on channel.
NCAA College Football games on NBC livestream on Peacock, so the best way to watch is to purchase a subscription starting at $12.99/month here. Not a subscriber? You can get a Peacock monthly subscription to stream Premier League soccer matches online, and keep it to watch other hits, including "Obsession," "The Wild Robot," "How To Train Your Dragon," "Reminders of Him," "The Traitors," "Vanderpump Rules" and others.
HBO Max starts at $10.99/month for the ad-supported plan. To go ad-free, prices jump up to $18.49/month or $22.99/month for ad-free programming in 4K Ultra HD. However, you can also get HBO Max bundle with Hulu and Disney+ starting at $19.99/month. Sign up to watch college football games on TNT Sports online, along with other live sports from MLB, NHL, NCAA March Madness, NASCAR and more.
However, the best way to livestream the 2026-27 NCAA College Football season is with a subscription to DirecTV, below. It's the most comprehensive overall.
For a complete 2026-2027 NCAA College Football season schedule, click here.