Disney+ has set a global distribution deal with the Pokémon Company International that will include a new stop-motion series coming in 2027.
The announcement comes on the heels of "Pokémon the Series: The Beginning" beginning to air on Disney XD earlier this month, marking it as the first title to launch under the new global distribution agreement. The show, which follows Ash and Pikachu as they embark on adventures throughout the Pokémon world, is now available for streaming on Disney+ in the U.S. and some international markets.
Titled "Pokémon Tales: The Misadventures of Sirfetch'd & Pichu," the new stop-motion project hails from animation studio Aardman and will debut on Disney XD and stream exclusively on Disney+.
Popular on Variety
Per the description for the new series, "Pokémon Tales: The Misadventures of Sirfetch'd & Pichu": Sirfetch'd and Pichu embark on an epic journey through the Galar Region. Together, they set out on a gallant quest to help and protect Pokémon across the region. Their missions rarely go as planned, but their noble deeds forge their friendship as they step bravely into the unknown where peril, alliances, rivalries, extraordinary Pokémon, and endless laughs await them.
"Pokémon Tales: The Misadventures of Sirfetch'd & Pichu" creative team at Aardman includes director Tom Parkinson, creative director of IP development Nat McKay and model making creative lead James Young.
The Pokémon-Disney distribution deal news was announced during a panel at Pokémon XP Friday, which is taking place over the next three days at the Moscone Center in San Francisco.
"Pokémon has that rare ability to mean something to longtime fans while continuing to feel completely relevant to young audiences today," Ayo Davis, president of Disney Kids and Family. "This new series 'Pokémon Tales: The Misadventures of Sirfetch'd & Pichu' brings Aardman's signature stop-motion artistry with a bold, playful new perspective to this beloved world, giving audiences a fresh way to experience the characters they know and love. Along with 'Pokémon the Series: The Beginning,' these series are powerful additions to Disney XD and Disney+."
"These stories, full of adventure and heroism, all told from the perspective of Pokémon is made even more exciting through the lens of the incredible filmmakers at Aardman," Pokémon director of original animation Phil Rynda added. "Audiences will be delighted getting to know the Sirfetch'd & Pichu, and wonderful cast of Pokémon, featured in this series. Aardman has brought Galar to life in a way that makes you feel like you can smell the air, touch the tree bark, and want to adventure alongside our series heroes."
Watch the trailer for the upcoming stop-motion series "Pokémon Tales: The Misadventures of Sirfetch'd & Pichu" below.