There is a new, immersive entertainment experience coming to the Las Vegas Sphere - and Oprah Winfrey is at the center of it.
Titled "Aha," the two-hour show is taking place four times across one weekend, from April 2-4, 2027. Winfrey will appear live on-stage and introduce performances from Grammy winner Jacob Collier, poet Ocean Vuong, musician Ajeet, gospel singer Wintley Phipps and more. The ticketed event is described in a press release as a "journey of light, sound, music, storytelling, nature and shared humanity."
"My first time at Sphere, I was blown away by this high-tech marvel of sound and images," Winfrey said in an announcement video. "I had a big aha moment: What if this magnificent space could take us to the edge of the universe and deep within ourselves for an immersive symphony of awe, wonder and joy? Aha! Join me for the ultimate aha moment at Sphere."
Popular on Variety
Elaborating in a press release, Winfrey continued, "'Aha' is a dream that came to me as I sat in awe at the opening night of U2 at the Sphere, mesmerized by the possibilities of how the space could be used as a tool for creating greater awareness and understanding of ourselves and our connection to each other. Creating this experience has felt like the culmination of what I've spoken about and worked towards my entire life."
Tickets start at $145 and will go on sale here starting on Sept. 25 at 10 a.m. PT.
Max Richter is the musical director of "Aha," which is directed by Ethan Tobman, produced by Baz Halpin and written by Tarell Alvin McCraney ("Moonlight"). The show features original works by stage designer Es Devlin and others.
The title and concept of the show will resonate with Winfrey fans: After all, it was she who popularized the term "aha moment" in the 1990s on her daytime talk show. Winfrey is the reason the phrase was added to the dictionary in 2012 by Miriam-Webster, which describes an aha moment as "a moment of sudden realization, inspiration, insight, recognition or comprehension."
"I always love those moments when I sit down to talk to somebody and they say things that make me look at life or a situation in a completely different way," Winfrey has explained, adding that an aha moment is like a "lightbulb, bing bing bing" moment in which "the little hairs on your arms stand up."