If you purchase an independently reviewed product or service through a link on our website, Variety may receive an affiliate commission.
Despite HBO Max hiking prices again last fall, the streamer is hoping to win over some new customers, with a 7-day free trial through Prime Video, just in time for the buzzy premiere of "Lanterns" and awards season pushes for critically-acclaimed shows like "Hacks" and "The Pitt."
While Amazon usually saves its streaming deals for Prime Day, this HBO Max offer is live on the site now and open to all customers with no promo code or membership required.
Once the week-long trial ends, the ad-supported HBO Max subscription will resume at its regular price of $10.99/month.
There's never been a better time to add an HBO Max subscription (formerly "Max") to your Prime Video streaming arsenal. HBO Max has had an exciting lineup of can't-miss new releases for 2026, including "DTF St. Louis," the return of Lisa Kudrow's "The Comeback" and the "Big Bang Theory" spin-off, "Stuart Fails to Save the Universe."
Returning favorites this year also included the third season of "The White Lotus" and the final season of "Euphoria."
HBO Max also has hundreds of new films on its roster, including "Marty Supreme," "The Drama," "Wuthering Heights," "We Live in Time," "Dune: Part Two" and "Joker Folie à Deux," in addition to beloved shows such as "The Sopranos," "The Wire" and "Curb Your Enthusiasm."
HBO Max doesn't offer a free trial on its own site, so the Prime Video deal is one of the only ways to get the streaming service for free. Worth noting: Amazon has removed this offer from its Prime streaming hub in the past without warning, so we recommend taking advantage of the free trial while it's still live.
You can also get HBO Max for free through DirecTV, which offers a free subscription when you sign-up for the streamer's MyEntertainment Genre Pack. Plans start at $42.99/month and get you 60+ live TV channels plus HBO Max, Disney+ and Hulu for free. See the DirecTV deal here.