Sony's "Spider-Man: Brand New Day" retained the No. 1 spot at the U.K. and Ireland box office for a fourth consecutive week, collecting £3.6 million ($4.8 million), according to Rentrak.
The superhero blockbuster pushed its running cumulative gross to $117.9 million.
Universal's "The Odyssey," directed by Christopher Nolan, held firmly in second place during its sixth frame, grossing $3.7 million to cross the $100 million milestone with a local total of $101.4 million.
Horror sequel "Insidious: Out of the Further," distributed by Sony, arrived in third place with an opening weekend of $2.9 million. Warner Bros.' "The End of Oak Street" followed in fourth position in its second weekend, adding $1.2 million for a running total of $6.2 million.
Popular on Variety
Black Bear's comedy "Spa Weekend" rounded out the top five with an opening haul of $668,191. Paramount's animated sequel "Paw Patrol: The Dino Movie" placed sixth in its third week with $643,678, bringing its cume to $5.9 million.
Mastershot Studios' Malayalam-language film "Bethlehem Kudumba Unit," one of India's Onam holiday releases, landed in seventh place with $593,485. Disney's animated holdover "Toy Story 5" took eighth position in its 10th week, generating $512,456 to lift its cume to $76.2 million.
Studiocanal's action thriller "Mutiny" opened in ninth place with $504,397. A24's "Tony" held the 10th spot in its sophomore session, collecting $461,807 for a total of $1.3 million.
Outside the top 10, Mubi's "Teenage Sex and Death at Camp Miasma," the third feature from director Jane Schoenbrun ("I Saw the TV Glow"), had a strong theatrical start across the U.K. and Ireland after opening on 176 screens . The film debuted at No. 11 with a Friday-to-Sunday gross of $306,438 and an overall opening haul of $445,317 including previews. Among English-language new releases, it secured the second-highest screen average of the frame behind "Insidious: Out of the Further," while achieving the top screen average of any specialized title in the top 15 ahead of "Tony."
The film surpassed the entire lifetime local gross of "I Saw the TV Glow" in its opening weekend alone. BFI Southbank served as Mubi's top-performing venue for the title and the cinema's third-biggest opening of the year, alongside strong regional showings at Lighthouse Dublin, Glasgow Film Theatre, Watershed Bristol, and sold-out screenings at Dukes at Komedia Brighton. The title also ranked as the third best-performing release across the Picturehouse circuit, trailing only "The Odyssey" and "Spider-Man: Brand New Day," as Mubi rolled the picture out across North America, Latin America, Italy, Germany, and Austria.
Looking ahead to the upcoming theatrical frame, mid-week event programming begins on Aug. 26 with Trafalgar Releasing rolling out music documentary "Ghost: 2 Big to Rig" across 100+ locations.
Wide debuts on Aug. 28 across 300+ locations include Disney's post-apocalyptic drama "The Dog Stars" starring Jacob Elordi and Josh Brolin, Vertigo Releasing's animated family feature "The Pout-Pout Fish" and Antonin Baudry's historical drama "De Gaulle: Résistance."
Films opening across 100+ locations include Universal's "One Night Only," Gregg Araki's "I Want Your Sex" from Black Bear and Anime Ltd.'s 4K release of "Kiki's Delivery Service." Studiocanal is opening Yeon Sang-ho's zombie thriller "Colony" and Curzon, Pedro Almodivar's "Bitter Christmas."
From India, Zee Studios International is opening "Hi," starring Nayanthara and Gujarati-labguage film "Tom and Cherry."