The long-awaited X-Men movie is finally coming to the MCU.
Marvel Studios exec Kevin Feige made the official announcement that the X-Men movie will release on May 5, 2028. The cast will include Sadie Sink as Jean Grey, Kit Connor as Cyclops, Samara Weaving as Emma Frost, Inde Navarrette as Rogue, Maya Boyd as Storm and Christopher Abbott as Prof. X. Adam Driver will play the evil Mr. Sinister.
It will be the first X-Men movie since Disney acquired Fox and its library of mutant characters. Several X-Men heroes have popped up in the MCU in recent years, and the billion-dollar blockbuster "Deadpool & Wolverine" and hit animated series "X-Men '97" on Disney+ have slowly brought the mutants back in force. Now, the heroes will get their first proper movie since Fox's "Dark Phoenix."
Popular on Variety
There have been cameos from Fox's X-Men stars in MCU movies, like Patrick Stewart reprising his role as Prof. Charles Xavier in "Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness." Kelsey Grammer also appeared in the ending of "The Marvels" as the super-smart, blue-haired scientist Beast.
After "Deadpool & Wolverine" paved the way for Fox's X-Men characters to return, "Avengers: Doomsday" is going all out. Stewart and Grammer will be back for the team-up movie, in addition to Ian McKellen as the magnetic mastermind Magneto, James Marsden as the laser beam-shooting Cyclops, Alan Cumming as the teleporting Nightcrawler and Rebecca Romijn as the shape-shifter Mystique. After debuting in "Deadpool & Wolverine," Channing Tatum's card-throwing Gambit will also join the team in "Doomsday," which hits theaters on Dec. 18.
Fox's X-Men movies were hits in the 2000s with the original X-trilogy and the prequel films, starring James McAvoy and Michael Fassbender as young Prof. Xavier and Magneto. Hugh Jackman's Wolverine was the breakout star of the franchise, landing himself three standalone movies and the blockbuster "Deadpool & Wolverine." However, the Fox franchise sputtered out with "New Mutants," leaving the X-Men without a home on the big screen.