Erin Andrews and Charissa Thompson, sportscasters and longtime friends, have inked a new partnership with The Volume, the media network founded by Colin Cowherd, for their hit podcast "Calm Down With Erin and Charissa."
Under the deal, The Volume will handle ad sales, production and distribution for "Calm Down," presenting new opportunities for marketers "to connect with one of the most-engaged female audiences in podcasting," according to the company. Andrews and Thompson's "Calm Down" podcast has been with iHeartMedia since its launch in 2021; The Volume maintains an ongoing partnership with iHeart.
Said Andrews: "'Calm Down' has always been about real conversations with our friends and our listeners, and The Volume gets that. We're excited to grow the show with a team that believes in what we've built."
Popular on Variety
Thompson added: "I'm so grateful to be back in Colin Cowherd's orbit. The Volume is the podcast house you want to hang out in-the dinner party you want an invite to because no matter who you're sitting next to, you know it's going to be a good time."
The duo have produced more than 400 episodes of "Calm Down." Their talk show provides a mix of sports, pop culture, relationships and life behind the scenes of their careers. Guests have included Kevin Hart, Miranda Lambert, Cameron Diaz, Derek Jeter, Wayne Gretzky and Ken Jeong, among others.
Andrews is the lead sideline reporter on Fox Sports' top NFL broadcast team and co-founder of sports apparel brand WEAR. Thompson hosts Prime Video's "Thursday Night Football" and "Fox NFL Kickoff."
Cowherd said in a statement, "I have known Erin and Charissa for years and there aren't enough words to describe how smart and talented they are. I could not be more excited to bring two of the most recognizable names in sports and entertainment to The Volume."
Logan Swaim, chief content officer at The Volume, commented, "Erin and Charissa are exactly the kind of talent we want at The Volume - smart, authentic, funny and completely themselves. 'Calm Down' gives us a chance to reach a huge female audience while letting two of the biggest personalities in sports media do what they do best: have great conversations. We're excited to build this next chapter with them."
The Volume's roster features personalities across sports and entertainment including Colin Cowherd, Fat Joe and Jadakiss ("Joe and Jada"), Nicole "Snooki" Polizzi ("It's Happening With Snooki & Joey"), Angie Martinez, Kevin Fredericks, Rory Farrell and Jamil "Mal" Clay ("New Rory & Mal") and Nick Wright. The company says it generates 1.5 billion monthly impressions across platforms.