Sony's superhero blockbuster "Spider-Man: Brand New Day" retained its top spot at the U.K. and Ireland box office for a second consecutive week, taking £10.1 million ($13.6) over its sophomore frame.
The film's cumulative total is now $87.4 million after 13 days of release.
Universal's epic "The Odyssey" held firm in second place during its fourth weekend of release. Directed by Christopher Nolan, the feature added $4.8 million, driving its running total to $82.6 million.
Paramount captured third place with the wide debut of animated feature "Paw Patrol: The Dino Movie," which banked an opening frame of $2.2 million. Disney's animated holdover "Toy Story 5" followed in fourth position in its eighth week, adding $848,063 to push its cume to $72.5 million. Universal's "Minions & Monsters" completed the top five in its sixth week, taking $557,564 to raise its running total to $21.5 million.
Popular on Variety
Piece Of Magic Entertainment claimed sixth spot with the specialized debut of "Andre Rieu's 2026 Summer Concert: Viva Maastricht!," drawing $671,742 across its event cinema rollout. Disney's live-action "Moana" occupied seventh place in its fifth frame, generating $490,552 to drive its cume to $15.9 million.
Studiocanal's horror feature "Ice Cream Man" entered the chart in eighth place, recording an opening frame of $414,256. Black Bear's comedy-drama "The Invite" captured ninth spot in its sixth week, adding $136,039 for a total of $5.1 million. Universal's long-running horror-romance "Obsession" rounded out the top 10 in its 13th week of release, collecting $88,242 to lift its cume to $26.3 million.
Looking ahead to the upcoming theatrical frame, Trafalgar is releasing Lee Kirk's comedy "Nimrods: A Green Day Comedy" into more than 100 locations.
Wide-circuit openings are led by Warner Bros.' sci-fi survival drama "End Of Oak Street," starring Anne Hathaway and Ewan McGregor, True Brit Entertainment's George Jaques-directed drama "Sunny Dancer" starring Bella Ramsey, and A24's Tony Bourdain feature "Tony" starring Dominic Sessa and Antonio Banderas.
Broad rollouts include MetFilm's Samuel Abrahams drama "Lady," Munro's Nat Boltt-directed drama "Holy Days," Signature's "Momo & The Time Thieves," Reelistic Dreams' "Never Had A Chance," and Park Circus re-issuing Aardman's animated comedy "The Pirates! In An Adventure With Scientists!".
Specialized and international counter-programming debuts include Mubi's "Ancestral Visions of the Future," Zee Studios International's Tamil-language rom-com "Hi!," Left Films' "Mermaid Beach," New Wave's Venice-winning drama "Songs of Forgotten Trees," and Dreamz Entertainment's Telugu-language supernatural fantasy "Agadha". The frame concludes with Source Entertainment launching Chris Atkins' music documentary "James: Getting Away With It" across more than 100 locations.