The one about love. The one about laughter. "The One About Matthew Perry," a Netflix documentary about the late "Friends" star is coming to the streamer on Oct. 27, and a trailer was revealed Tuesday ahead of its release.
The two-minute trailer chronicles Perry's experience with fame and the realization that it was not actually everything he wanted. Using testimonies from his sister Mia Perry Bowick, several other close friends and unreleased photos and videos from the Perry family's private archive, the three-part series explores his career as a beloved actor and comedian while also revealing details about his long-term struggle with drug use and his attempts to get sober. The release of the film comes on the third anniversary of Perry's death.
"It's taken time for me to feel ready to share these memories and what it was like to love Matthew through all the complexity of his life - to see him as a whole person, not just as Chandler and not just as someone who struggled with addiction," Perry Bowick said in a statement. "As his sister, he shaped who I am today, the person I strive to be and the work to which I've devoted my life. Matthew had a beautiful heart and a generous spirit, and even in his darkest moments, he could still make you laugh and feel loved. I hope this series gives everyone who loved him, whether personally or from afar, a deeper appreciation for who he truly was and the legacy he survived by."
Popular on Variety
In addition to testimony from Perry Bowick, the series will include stories of firsthand memories from Perry's friends David Pressman and Roger Castillo, along with several former girlfriends. There will also be new interviews with collaborators from his early sitcom work and later TV and film career, including a firsthand account of Perry's audition for "Friends" and the creation of Chandler Bing, as told by former NBC President Warren Littlefield and Season 1 writer Jeff Strauss. It will also provide new firsthand accounts of his journey with addiction and recovery, shared by the people closest to him.
The documentary is directed by Mary Robertson and is executive produced by Robertson, Lisa Kalikow, Eli Holzman and Aaron Saidman. Lora Moftah is a co-executive producer alongside producer Jessica Call and production company Maxine Productions, a part of Sony Pictures Television.
"Matthew Perry was one of the comedic geniuses of our time," Robertson said. "Through his many films, TV and stage performances and his unforgettable portrayal of Chandler Bing, he made millions of us laugh, connect and feel a little less alone. He also gave us so much more by bravely speaking about addiction. Yet the public only knew part of his story. That's why we set out to make this series: to let the people who knew and loved Matthew reveal the person behind the public figure."
Watch the full trailer here: