U.K.-French sales outfit Alief has snapped international rights outside the Baltics and Poland to "Dice-Ching-a-Mat" from Lithuanian filmmaker Kristijonas Vildziunas, whose earlier works bowed in Venice ("The Lease"), Cannes Un Certain Regard ("You Am I") and twice served as Lithuania's Oscar bets ("Seneca's Day," "Songs for a Fox").
The feature was powered by Vildziunas's regular partner Uljana Kim, one of Lithuania's most esteemed producers, recipient of the prestigious Eurimages International Co-Production Award in 2023.
Popular on Variety
The announcement was made on the eve of the Warsaw International Film Festival where the film bows in competition.
In a trailer shared with Variety, sci-fi blends with reality, with the main protagonist Vilis (seasoned actor Dainus Gavenonis from "Poetas," "The Southern Chronicles"), stuck in a mysterious Cube, similar to an old Soviet elevator, asking for help to get out.
In the claustrophobic space - a physical representation of Vilis' mind, a voice in an intercom tells him that to reclaim his lost identity, he must exit through a red door and return by the green.
In different sequences, he finds his way back to real life and to his family, affected by the pandemic. As he learns to master the mechanism, he understands that he needs to get a grip of his life and reconnect with his three adult children and wife that he had emotionally abandoned. "I drowned in my work. I don't remember you as kids which makes me really sad," he tells his children.
Playing against Gavenonis are Vilma Raubaitė ("Toxic"), Adelė Šuminskaitė, Maksim Semionov and Vaidilė Juozaitytė.
"'Dice-Ching-O-Mat' presents a grounded high concept story about personal transformation, familial bonds, and navigating life's unexpected challenges whole heartedly. It converges time travel with generational drama into a rewarding experience," said Miguel Govea, partner at Alief which repped Vildziunas' previous pic "Songs for a Fox."
"[The film is] for those interested in visually striking, emotionally engaging drama with a fantastical twist," added Alief president Brett Walker.
Unpacking the genesis of the film, Vildziunas said the idea grew out of his personal experience with COVID back in 2020, when the world suddenly shut down.
"I would say that with every challenge, personal or collective, beyond all the pain and suffering, lies a gift to be unpacked," he said, referring to his own realization during the pandemic, that "I had spent all my best years on my career and could not even remember what my kids were like when they were small."
He added: "My relationships with the people closest to me had been left on autopilot, and the emotional connection had been lost somewhere along the way. And I understood that I wanted it back! In the silence of that full stop, I realized that I did not know who I was anymore. So 'Dice-Ching-o-Mat' is based on that feeling," he said.
On the enigmatic title and meaning of the Cube, Vildziunas said, "I felt that this story could not be horizontal, that it was impossible to tell it without a tangible reflection of the protagonist's inner world, without showing how his mind works."
He set his focus on a scholar, devoted to "an extremely obscure subject" - the ancient Chinese divination text I Ching-but contrastingly unable to grasp his own life.
The writer-director then made his character's saturated mind look like "an old Soviet lift, oddly intermingled with the symbolism of a game based on the I Ching."
"The title is derived from all of that," said Vildziunas. "Dice represents chance and the game, Ching stands for the I Ching, and "o-Mat" for an automation."
Aesthetically, Vildziunas said he had no single visual model for the film. "The visual approach" he insisted, "was dictated by the chapters which show different stages of the protagonist's inner odyssey back home, from a rigid state of mind to emotional reconnection. So we took a risk and filmed them quite differently, using different lenses, compositions, mise-en-scène and colours."
Quizzed on the biggest challenge on a production standpoint, Kim cited the building of the Cube, an elevator-like set. "Nothing this complex had previously been constructed and filmed in Lithuania," she stated, explaining that to make the workflow more efficient, two identical Cubes, suspended from a crane, mounted on vibrating platforms and attached to a centrifuge had to be built. "It was a lot to achieve with a limited budget of €1.5 million ($1.7 million)," she stressed.
The film was produced by Lithuania's Studio Uljana Kim, in co-production with Latvia's Studio Locomotive, Estonia's Filmivabrik and Poland's Documentary and Feature Film Studios (WFDiF), with support from the Lithuanian Film Centre, the National Film Centre of Latvia, the Estonian Film Institute, Estonian Cultural Endowment, Lithuanian National Radio and Television and Vilnius Film Fund.
Distribution in the co-production territories is set for 2027.