Ken Jeong, Randall Park and Daniel Dae Kim lead the star-studded cast of Audible's new comedy series "The Moons of LA" - featuring a meta twist involving a kid who's obsessed with true-crime podcasts and uses her investigative skills to save her parents' marriage.
"The Moons of LA" premieres Oct. 8 exclusively at Audible. The comedy audio series is co-produced by Kim's 3AD production company, marking the latest collaboration under his first-look deal with Audible. It comes after 2024's "Yellow Face," Kim's Audible Original adaptation of David Henry Hwang's play of the same name that transferred to Broadway with Kim in the lead role.
"The Moons of LA" also stars Jae Suh Park and Alyssa Abiera, alongside a predominantly AAPI cast including Jimmy O. Yang, John Cho, Sherry Cola, Vivian Bang, Sydney Park and Liza Soberano.
Popular on Variety
The coming-of-age comedy follows Chloe Moon (played by Abiera), a precocious middle schooler obsessed with true-crime podcasts who dreams of becoming an investigative journalist. When she discovers her parents' marriage is on the rocks, Chloe does what any aspiring detective would do: She launches an investigation. Armed with a microphone and relentless curiosity, she interviews family and friends - from gregarious halmeonis over plates of banchan to her father's boisterous golf buddies - determined to solve the mystery of her parents' relationship and save her family.
Written by Paul Bae ("The Black Tapes") and directed by James Kim ("Moonface"), "The Moons of LA" is executive produced by Kim, Jeong, John Cheng, Will Malnati and Ashley Taylor. The series is co-produced by Audible, 3AD and At Will Media.
"I'm excited to continue our partnership with Audible on Paul Bae's wonderful 'The Moons of LA,'" Kim said in a statement provided to Variety. "We've been lucky enough to bring together a stellar cast to tell a story that is both unique to Korean American identity and universal in its exploration of the definition of personal success. I'm grateful to 3AD, our entire creative team and Audible for bringing it to life."
Jeong commented: "I'm so grateful to be part of 'The Moons of LA.' I'm very thankful to my friend Daniel, our amazing writer Paul Bae and the incredible cast and team who brought this project to life. I'm honored to be involved, and I'm excited for people to hear it."
Watch interviews with Jeong, Park and Yang about "The Moons of LA" and behind-the-scenes clips of them recording a scene from the show: