The concert film "George Michael: The Faith Tour" has been acquired by Universal Pictures Content Group and Bleecker Street's event cinema division Crosswalk.
Universal Pictures Content Group will release the film internationally, and Bleecker Street's Crosswalk will release the film in North America.
Shot at the Palais Omnisports de Paris-Bercy during the European leg of the Faith Tour in
1988, the film features never-before-seen footage of Michael.
The concert film is directed by Michael's longtime collaborators Andy Morahan ("Last Christmas"; "Faith"; "Careless Whisper") and David Austin (George Michael "Freedom Uncut", "George Michael at the Palais Garnier, Paris"). Screening with an opening original short film by Mary McCartney ("If These Walls Could Sing; "Mary McCartney Serves It Up!") and produced by George Michael Entertainment and Globe Originals, in partnership with Mercury Studios, the film is slated for a late 2026 worldwide release in theaters in premium formats. In the U.S., Bleecker Street will partner with Imax on exclusive early
access screenings.
Popular on Variety
"George Michael: The Faith Tour" transforms archival footage assembled from a 14-camera shoot captured on 35mm film over two nights, into a cinematic event and audio experience. The film opens with an original short, "Finding Faith," which features voice-over from Michael during an unheard interview alongside unseen images captured by photographer Herb Ritts, and behind-the-scenes footage of the "Faith" music video.
The deal was negotiated by Helen Parker for Universal Pictures Content Group and Avy Eschenasy for Bleecker Street.
Parker said, "George at the height of the Faith tour was simply electrifying - there's a magnetic force of charisma and connection with the audience that feels just as powerful today as it did then." She added, "To see these performances brought to life on the big screen, in such a cinematic and immersive way,
makes this incredibly special - particularly for those who were there or remember that moment so vividly. We also can't wait for a whole new generation to experience just how extraordinary he was as a creative force, performer and musical auteur."
Bleecker Street CEO Kent Sanderson said, "An icon of his generation and beyond, George Michael was at the height of his creative and cultural power during the Faith tour, a defining moment that was made for the big screen. Through beautifully restored archival footage and intimate, never-before-heard interviews, audiences will be given a front-row seat to a beloved artist at the peak of his impact."
Hit singer Michael, the founding member of the duo Wham!, died at the age of 53 in 2016. The singer sold more than 100 million albums over a career spanning almost four decades.
"We are incredibly proud of 'George Michael: The Faith Tour' and the extraordinary craftsmanship that has gone into bringing this footage to life," said Ken Danquah, Chief Finance & Commercial Officer, Mercury Studios. "We're excited to be partnering with such world-class distributors as Universal Pictures Content Group and Crosswalk, whose proven track record and expertise in delivering immersive cinematic events make them the perfect partners to bring this film to audiences around the world."
The London-born singer, whose real name was Georgios Kyriacos Panayiotou, formed Wham! in 1981 with school friend Andrew Ridgeley, and the pop duo went on to have a string of hits, including "Wake Me Up Before You Go-Go," "Club Tropicana" and "Last Christmas."
Michael and Ridgeley parted ways in 1986, and the former embarked on a solo career. His first album, "Faith," sold more than 25 million copies, and won a Grammy.
"George was utterly unique, both as a man and an artist. Having had the great privilege of personally working closely with him and his team over the years, the opportunity to bring The Faith Tour to audiences through Globe Originals is an honor," said Lucie Avery, general manager, Globe Originals. "Mercury Studios, working hand-in-hand with George Michael Entertainment, brought their unrivaled expertise and vision to this project from the outset. The result is a film that truly honors his timeless legacy."
Alongside the theatrical release, George Michael Entertainment and Sony Music Entertainment will release "The Faith Tour", an 18-track live album of previously unreleased recordings featuring hits from Michael's Wham! and solo catalogs.