A Los Angeles federal jury on Friday found Grammy-winning rapper Lil Durk not guilty of murder-for-hire, conspiracy and stalking resulting in death charges in the 2022 killing of rapper Quando Rondo's cousin, according to the Los Angeles Times.
Prosecutors alleged that rapper (real name: Durk Banks) directed hit men to target rapper Quando Rondo, born Tyquian Bowman, for revenge after the death of his friend Dayvon Bennett, a.k.a. the rapper King Von. However, prosecutors claimed, the gunmen fatally shot Bowman's cousin Saviay'a Robinson at the crowded Los Angeles shopping mall the Beverly Center. Prosecutors said three gunmen fired 18 rounds at the vehicle in which Bowman and Robinson were riding.
Popular on Variety
Deandre Wilson and David Lindsey, who prosecutors claimed was one of the gunmen, were also on trial and were convicted on the charges of conspiracy to commit stalking, stalking using a dangerous weapon and stalking resulting in death, but were acquitted on the murder-for-hire charges. Wilson's attorney had claimed that he was just a "passenger" during the murder.
One prosecutor, Assistant U.S. Attorney Ian Yanniello, said, "No one is saying he was the one on the ground with a gun in his hand in Los Angeles, but you know this story doesn't happen without him, and it doesn't make sense without his leadership," adding that Durk "used his money, his power, and his influence to try to kill his biggest opp."
The prosecution relied largely on testimony from three cooperating witnesses: Kacey Hester - also known as OTF Jam - and Keith Jones, as well as Durk's former assistant Kavon Grant.
Defense attorney Brian Steel described the three as unreliable "snitches, cooperators, rats" hoping to receive lighter sentences.
"[Grant] has manipulated the people in this case, he has manipulated the FBI, the LAPD, and respectfully, has been manipulating the members of the U.S. Attorney's Office," said another defense attory, Drew Findling. "Well, folks, it is time for you to say ... 'He will not manipulate us.'"
Durk, 32, is a key figurehead in the Chicago drill music scene, which has spawned numerous rap stars including Chief Keef, Lil Reese and G Herbo. His past five solo albums debuted in the top five on the Billboard 200, and his 2023 single "All My Life" featuring J. Cole hit No. 2 on the Hot 100. Earlier this year, that song won a Grammy for best melodic rap performance.
The incident that allegedly spurred the shooting took place in Atlanta in 2020, after Bennett scuffled with Bowman outside a hookah lounge and was fatally shot by someone in Bowman's entourage.
The trial was a media circus, with crowds of fans and tourists surround the courthouse and celebrities including Kanye West and the rapper MGK turning up to support Durk.