Jeremy Clarkson is already thinking about what comes next for him after "Clarkson's Farm."
His hit farming series launched on Prime Video in 2021 and quickly became a fan favorite on the streaming service. He has just wrapped Season 6.
"We're currently thinking about what do we do after 'Clarkson's Farm,' and it's going to have to be something bigger to stand out, to protect us from this onslaught from underneath," Clarkson said, referring to social media and the tech revolution. "It has to be unbelievably ambitious."
"We've always had event television, but there's very little of it nowadays. But I just think that television must now get bigger. There's nothing to worry about above because the cinemas have it. But the shows, if you actually look, gardening shows, how they're going to survive, especially [media horticulturist] Monty Don, you know, because anyone can do a gardening thing on social media. Or cookery, same thing. It's very difficult to make a television show work unless you're cooking on the moon or doing something incredible. And that's where I think television has to get bigger, lose scheduling, and get bigger."
Popular on Variety
He cited "The Traitors" as a "very good example" of an eye-catching show in today's media landscape, saying "they get proper celebrities on that, and it's a great show."
Clarkson, who was speaking at the Royal Television Society conference in London, U.K. alongside his content creator daughter Emily Clarkson, also dismissed media regulator's Ofcom as being toothless.
"You know what, it doesn't really matter," he said with regard to Ofcom's handling of complaints, for which he had several noted ones during his time as host of "Top Gear." "I read in The Daily Mail that I'd had my wrist slapped. But nobody did that. Nothing actually happened."
Clarkson also took pride in what he claimed was an Ofcom record.
"I think I've got two separate Ofcom complaints from the same show but for two different things. I don't think anybody's ever beaten it," he said, adding that he was "desperately proud because nothing happened."