Bill Oddie, the English comedian and conservationist known for hosting wildlife programs including BBC's "Springwatch," has died. He was 85.
Oddie's agent, David Foster, confirmed his death in a statement to BBC News on Monday, calling him "the country's best-loved birder."
Foster continued: "Bill was a multi-talented celebrity - wildlife presenter, broadcaster, comedian, writer, songwriter, musician and conservationist. Yet it was never fame that he valued. Instead he encouraged us to respect and protect the environment. He taught us the wonder of it. He protested, lobbied and campaigned for it. He led the way and people of all ages and backgrounds responded to his call. And such a massive contribution to conservation will never be forgotten."
Oddie got his start on the TV comedy series "The Goodies" alongside his Cambridge classmates Tim Brooke-Taylor and Graeme Garden, which ran from 1970 to 1982. He then shifted to presenting and focused on his love of wildlife, specifically birds. He hosted a slew of successful nature programs for the BBC from the mid-80s to 2008, including "Birding With Bill Oddie," "Bill Oddie Goes Wild," "Springwatch," "Autumnwatch" and more.
Popular on Variety
Born on July 7, 1941, in Rochdale, Lancashire, England, Oddie moved to Birmingham at a young age and was raised by his father and grandmother. He went on to study English literature at Cambridge University, and it was there that he became interested in comedy, appearing in several productions of the sketch comedy troupe Footlights.
In the late '60s, he began his venture into show business as a key member of the BBC radio program "I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again," on which several of his musical compositions were featured. After writing and performing on comedy series including "Twice a Fortnight" and "Broaden Your Mind," Oddie got his big break with "The Goodies," known for its surreal sketches and situational comedy. In addition to writing and acting on the series, Oddie wrote all the music including co-penning the show's theme song.
In the mid-'80s, Oddie became increasingly interested in wildlife, drawing from his lifelong passion of birdwatching. This kickstarted the second phase of his career, in which he became a beloved nature presenter known for programs including "Oddie in Paradise" (1985), "Birding With Bill Oddie" (1997-1998, 2000), "Bill Oddie Goes Wild" (2001-2003), "Bill Oddie's How to Watch Wildlife" (2005-2006), "Springwatch" (2005-2008), "Autumnwatch" (2006-2008) and "Bill Oddie's Wild Side" (2008).
In 2003, he was made an OBE for his services to wildlife conservation.
Oddie is survived by his wife Laura and daughters Bonnie, Kate and Rosie.