"The Summer I Turned Pretty" and "Hadestown" star Lola Tung and "Romeo + Juliet" actor Daniel Bravo Hernández are set to lead a benefit reading of "Sanctuary City" from Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright Martyna Majok at New York Theatre Workshop.
The Oct. 9 reading, produced by Level Forward and Colt Coeur, will benefit the nonprofit RAICES, which supports and promotes justice efforts on behalf of immigrants and refugees who are seeking asylum. "Sanctuary City" revolves around two immigrant teenagers in post-9/11 Newark, N.J. who become each other's source of sanctuary.
LISTEN: Variety's Up Next Podcast: Lola Tung on 'The Summer I Turned Pretty' Movie, Dancing With Hudson Williams and New Horror Projects 'Forbidden Fruits' and 'The Young People'
Popular on Variety
"I'm beyond thrilled to be sharing Sanctuary City in NYC again, home to so many souls who daily live the experiences of these characters - and far, far beyond," Majok said. "I'm exceedingly proud to be coming together in support and admiration of RAICES, one of our most vital national organizations, fighting for the American ideals of life, liberty and justice for all by defending immigrants' rights. Their work is essential always, but especially at this crucial time. This play is a love letter to friendship and ambition despite the odds, and the working class immigrant's dream of a full, expansive life in their own homes."
New York Theatre Workshop produced the original Off Broadway production of "Sanctuary City" in 2020. Tickets to the reading can be purchased here.
"Because stories change the world, we're bringing 'Sanctuary City' back, at a time when change is
desperately needed. 'Sanctuary City' reflects our reality, and wedges open a window view of what
can be. Artists are standing up. Audiences are standing up. Service organizations defending
immigrant rights are standing up. Together, through imagination, creativity and collective action,
we rise," said Level Forward.
Tung broke through with her role in Amazon Prime Video's "The Summer I Turned Pretty" series. She also had a run as a star of Broadway's "Hadestown." She was on screen this year with the Lili Reinhart indie "Forbidden Fruits" and appeared in "Chasing Summer," from filmmaker Josephine Decker. Tung recently completed production on "The Young People," for distributor Neon. It was directed by Osgood Perkins and co-starred Nicole Kidman and Nico Parker. Tung at present is filming Halina Reijn's upcoming A24 film "Please," with Gracie Abrams and Connor Storrie.
Hernandez is a New York stage veteran known for appearing in such production as Off Broadway's "Much Ado about Nothing," "Spread" and "Romeo and Juliet" (via Shakespeare in the Park).
(Pictured: Lola Tung)