If you purchase an independently reviewed product or service through a link on our website, Variety may receive an affiliate commission.
In an epic bout, Premier Boxing Champions travels to Nevada this weekend, as Las Vegas-native Rolando "Rolly" Romero (17-2-0) defends his WBA welterweight title against Brooklyn-born boxer Teofimo Lopez (22-2-0) in a high-profile match.
Romero vs. Lopez takes place on Saturday, Aug. 22 at T-Mobile Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada with a start time of 8 p.m. ET/5 p.m. PT. The main event, which is set for 12 rounds, begins at 11 p.m. ET/8 p.m. PT.
Since the bout is in Las Vegas, there may be a few celebrities in-attendance to watch the title bout. Previous PBC fights have brought out stars, like Mike Tyson, Michael B. Jordan, Tracey Morgan, Mark Wahlberg, Chance the Rapper and others. To find out who is at the match, watch the pay-per-view livestream.
How to Watch Rolly Romero vs. Teofimo Lopez Online
Want to watch the PBC fight online? Rolly Romero vs. Teofimo Lopez boxing pay-per-view livestream is available to watch on DAZN for $79.99.
If you're not a subscriber, you can sign up for DAZN's "Ultimate Tier" plan for just $49.99/month to get access to this PPV event, as well as 11 other PPV events throughout the year at no extra cost. It's just a flat monthly subscription price. The plan has access to more than 100 live fights all year long, as well as fight replays, highlights and documentaries.
DAZN is the home to global sports, including FIFA, BKFC, National League, UEFA Women's Championship League, ERC and WRC racing, Riyadh Season boxing, NFL Game Pass International and other American and international sports leagues.
Taking place on Saturday, Aug. 22, Rolly Romero vs. Teofimo Lopez PPV is available to livestream on DAZN for $79.99.
Fight Card, 8 p.m. ET/5 p.m. PT
- Welterweight: Rolly Romero vs. Teofimo Lopez - Main Event, WBA Title Fight
- Middleweight: Yoenli Hernandez vs. Francisco Daniel Veron
- Super Bantamweight: Victor Santillan vs. Gary Antonio Russell
- Super Lightweight: Carlos Utria vs. Israel Mercado
Additionally, you can livestream the Rolly Romero vs. Teofimo Lopez PPV for $79.99 on Prime Video.