Spotify and Joe Rogan have entered into a new multiyear licensing agreement, extending a relationship that began in 2020 for his hugely popular podcast.
Under the agreement, Spotify will continue to handle ad sales and licensing for "The Joe Rogan Experience," which is available across multiple services. Terms of the agreement have not been disclosed. Rogan's new multiyear deal is similar to the one he cut with Spotify in early 2024, and he's set to receive "an estimated earnout of $250 million" over the term, the Wall Street Journal reported, citing anonymous sources.
"The partnership with Spotify has been an amazing fit, and they're incredible to work with," Rogan said in a statement. "I'm extremely happy and excited to continue with them for years to come."
Popular on Variety
Jordan Newman, head of content partnerships at Spotify, said, "Joe has built something incredibly enduring, and his show continues to resonate with a massive global audience because there's simply nothing else like it. Spotify's podcast business has grown alongside 'JRE' over the years, and we're excited to keep building on that partnership for years to come."
Rogan has gained a legion of fans for his brash, shoot-from-the-hip commentary, while generating controversy over his rightward-leaning politics. The comedian and talk-show personality endorsed Trump for president in 2024 shortly after hosting him on "JRE," but Rogan has more recently grown critical of Trump.
Spotify and Rogan first announced their partnership in 2020, when "The Joe Rogan Experience" came to Spotify in September of that year and later became exclusive to the platform. In 2024, Rogan ended his deal that made "JRE" exclusive to the platform.
"The Joe Rogan Experience" was the No. 1 most-listened-to podcast on Spotify, YouTube and Apple Podcasts in 2025. With 18 million followers on Spotify, it has been the most-followed podcast on the platform since the partnership began in 2020.
"The Joe Rogan Experience" has featured guests spanning comedians, athletes, actors, musicians, authors, scientists, entrepreneurs and more. Since launching in December 2009, the show has produced more than 2,500 episodes, each averaging two to three hours in length.