Veteran Icelandic producer Hlín Jóhannsdóttir of Ursus Parvus, behind titles from some Iceland's most renowned filmmakers including Fridrik Thor Fridriksson, Dagur Kári and Rúnar Rúnarsson, has signed with French-U.K. sales outfit Alief on the coming-of-age "Just a Kid" ("Bara barn") by up-and-coming writer-director Vala Ómarsdóttir.
To be pitched at New Nordic Films' Works in Progress in Haugesund, Aug. 27, the project fits into Jóhannsdóttir's roster of debut features by talented female directors, next to "Quake" by Tinna Hrafnsdóttir, which Alief sold to more than 20 territories including Juno Films in the U.S.
Besides Alief, which chipped in an Minimum Guarantee, a strong partner on the project is Estonian producer Marianne Ostrat of Alexandra Film, producer of Sundance winner and Estonian Oscar entry "Smoke Sauna Sisterhood," co-produced by Ursus Parvus.
Popular on Variety
In "Just a Kid," the story turns on 16-year old Julia (Birgitta Marín Thorsdottir) who's moved from Norway to Iceland and struggles to balance caring for her younger sister with fitting in at a new school. Drawn to charismatic Salka (Hafrún Arna Levy from "When the Light Breaks In") and the school newspaper, she begins to find her voice. But when a traumatic drunken night resurfaces, Júlía must confront shame, family responsibilities and the courage to tell her own story, reads the logline.
Speaking with Variety, the versatile filmmaker and performer Ómarsdóttir said the idea for the pic developed when she was pregnant with her second daughter. "I remember thinking about this bond we have, knowing that at some point when [my kids] get older they will not need me as much as they do now. I am very interested in this mother-daughter bond, especially concerning the teenage years," said the helmer.
After researching "what it feels like being a teenager today," Ómarsdóttir said she drew from the rehearsal-driven sessions with her young cast "to continue the research, understand, and tell the story from their point of view." "The whole experience was a long and exciting journey where I learned and discovered so many things. Both in visual storytelling and in human nature regarding the need to connect with someone and the need to set boundaries," she said.
Alief partner Miguel Govea who boarded the pic at development stage said "the story and setting drew us in. Once we saw the rehearsals, and proof of concept, we knew Hlin [Hrafnsdóttir] and Vala [Ómarsdóttir] had concocted some magic."
Boiling down the story and audience appeal he added: "Just a Kid" is a tender story of teen-angst and sexual awakening with a handsome cast that will resonate with discerning audiences."
"Just a Kid" received funding from the Icelandic Film Centre, Icelandic tax rebates, RÚV, Saga Film, Studio Syrland, Nordisk Film & TV Fond, and Estonian tax rebates. Max will handle the theatrical release in Iceland.
"Driving Mum" Team
In Haugesund, Jóhannsdóttir will also pitch at the Nordic Co-Production Market another project very close to her heart: "At The End of the Road," which reunites her with the core team of the Tallinn Grand Prix winner "Driving Mum:" writer/director Hilmar Oddsson, prominent actor Þröstur Leó Gunnarsson ("Noi the Albino," "Solitude") and Hera Hilmar ("Mortal Engines," "Life in a Fishbowl").
In it, Leó, a renowned geriatrician specialized in Alzheimer's disease, develops an unconventional friendship with Ásdís, a psychiatrist who's returned to Iceland to care for her ailing grandmother. When Ásdís discovers that Leó himself is developing Alzheimer's, both are forced to confront buried secrets.
Jóhannsdóttir said she contributed to the development process with Oddsson and Gunnarsson as all have personal experiences about Alzheimer's. "Sitting together, the three of us, and discussing the script was among the most rewarding experiences of my career as a creative producer," she told Variety, underlining that the tone will remain darkly humorous. "I think a lot of people familiar with the disease will relate to the tragi-comedic side of Alzheimer's."
"At the End of the Road" will "hopefully be both funny and dramatic, poetic, dreamlike, and realistic all at once," said Oddsson in a statement.
In Haugesund, Jóhannsdóttir will be looking for co-producers, co-financiers, sales and distribution.
Commenting on the fact that "Just and Kid" and "At the End of the Road" are the only Icelandic projects selected for the popular the Norwegian Intl. Film Festival's New Nordic Films showcase (Aug. 25-28) at Haugesund, the seasoned producer, who sat on the board of the Icelandic Producers Association for several years, said "things are very difficult in Iceland, funding-wise."
Citing the important Aug. 29 Icelandic referendum on whether to resume EU membership talks, she said: "our small nation is split, but it is really important for us producers that people at least to say 'yes' to the negotiations."