"Looksmaxxing" influencer Clavicular has been charged with rape and drugging in Massachusetts, according to online court records viewed by Variety.
A list of charges filed on Sept. 8 show that the 20-year-old, whose real name is Braden Peters, faces one count of rape, one count of drugging someone for sexual intercourse and one count of procuring liquor for someone under 21 years of age. The alleged offenses occurred on May 23, 2025, and an arraignment is set for Oct. 14. Clavicular is not currently in custody.
The Bulwark was the first to report on the charges. Clavicular's representative, Mitchell Jackson, said in a statement to NBC News: "Braden Peters has not been physically served. As usual The Bulwark is exaggerating." The Bulwark told People that Clavicular's rep "has not notified of us of any factual errors in the story. Anyone can look up these court documents and see for themselves." A lawyer for Clavicular did not immediately respond to Variety's request for comment.
Popular on Variety
Clavicular has gained internet fame for his "looksmaxxing" practices, which have included injections and "bone smashing," where one breaks facial bones in the hopes of achieving more defined features. He often demonstrates these methods on social media, including on TikTok and the livestream platform Kick.
More details about the allegations were not immediately available, and the alleged victim was not named in accordance with Massachusetts law.
However, several reports have pointed out that the timeline could line up with a civil lawsuit that was recently brought against Clavicular by an 18-year-old influencer. In a complaint filed in Miami, Aleksandra Vasilevna Mendoza accused Clavicular of battery, fraud and sexual misconduct in a series of events that took place in 2025. As reported by CBS News, she alleged that he injected her face with Aqualyx, a fat-dissolving substance not approved by the FDA, without her consent when she was a minor. Mendoza also alleged she had nonconsensual sexual encounters with Clavicular at his family home in Cape Cod while she was intoxicated. Clavicular denied the allegations and filed a motion to dismiss several counts of the lawsuit in July, including that of sexual misconduct, claiming that it was not included in the first iteration of the complaint.
Clavicular was quick to take to social media following news of the charges on Monday night, posting a video of Mendoza where she called him "super nice" and a letter she allegedly wrote thanking him for "helping me as much as you have been." He also shared a livestream clip where Mendoza says she is 18, though it is unclear when it was filmed.
This is not the first time Clavicular has faced legal trouble. In summer 2024, he was arrested after a bar fight and faced with assault and battery charges, though they were dismissed. In February of this year, he was arrested in Arizona on suspicion of dangerous drug possession, but prosecutors dropped the case. In March, he was arrested in Florida on battery charges relating to an alleged altercation between his girlfriend and another woman, which were later dropped. And, a month later, he was charged with unlawfully discharging a firearm relating to shooting a deceased alligator on a livestream. He was sentenced to six months of probation and 20 hours of community service following a plea deal.