Documentary festival DOC NYC returns for its 17th year in Manhattan from Nov. 11-19 and continues online through Nov. 29.
Èlia Gasull Balada and Matteo Norzi's "The Hummingbird Paints Fragrant Songs" will open the festival. The film follows 75-year-old Indigenous artist Sara Flores, who emerges from the Peruvian Amazon into the global contemporary art scene.
Closing the festival will be Kate Davis and David Heilbroner's "Totality," about the 2024 solar eclipse that swept across a path of communities in North America, and the power of collectively looking up for a brief moment to take stock of our personal universes.
"Union Town," Barbara Kopple's examination of three laborers seeking better working conditions, unionization and basic human decency, will be the festival's centerpiece film.
Popular on Variety
The Special Presentations program of the festival includes world premieres of Joe Berlinger's 1980s televangelist chronicle "Primetime Preacher$" and Abhay and Halavah Sofsky's portrait of the scandal-ridden New Vrindaban commune, "Palace of Gold."
The main slate includes 115 feature-length documentaries including 26 world premieres and 27 U.S. premieres. There will also be over 200 films and dozens of events with filmmakers expected in person at certain screenings. The short list, winner's circle and select encore sections will be announced at a later date.
"Each year, we are struck by the extraordinary range of stories that documentary filmmakers are bringing to the screen and this year's Main Slate is especially rich in its breadth, ambition and artistry," artistic director of DOC NYC Jaie Laplante said. "From intimate portraits and deeply personal journeys to urgent investigations, stories of resistance and films that explore the natural world, these documentaries offer fresh perspectives on the world around us and the people who shape it. We're thrilled to present such a dynamic group of filmmakers and to give audiences the opportunity to experience their work."
Find more information about the program at DOCNYC.net.