The producers of upcoming British boxing biopic "In the Shadows" have successfully staged a last-minute rescue mission to save their film after its U.K. distributor True Brit Entertainment filed for administration in late September.
The feature - based on the true story of trailblazing British-Somali boxer, model and UNICEF Ambassador Ramla Ali and due to have its world premiere at the London Film Festival on Oct. 9 - will now be self-released theatrically in the U.K. thanks to additional support from its financiers.
Popular on Variety
"We had to mobilize very quickly - it really was the 11th hour," said Lee Magiday (a BAFTA winner and Oscar nominee for "The Favourite"), who produces alongside Madeleine Sanderson ("Being AP," "Fighting for a City"). Magiday said they only found out in mid-September that there would be no money for the P&A spend. "So we had to ask our backers - our exec producers - whether they could put even more money into the film, which, thank God, they did."
Following it's London Film Festival premiere, "In the Shadows" will now screen across the U.K. in more than 30 screens starting with a special screening and Q&A on Oct. 30 with the cast and creatives at London's Genesis Cinema, close to where the film was shot. With near perfect timing, Ali then has a world title fight on Nov. 8 in the U.S. and will return to the U.K. to help support the film with further special event screenings and Q&As.
Magiday and Sanderson praised their exec producers Richard Fearn, Anushka Shah and Natasha Mudhar for their additional financial support to enable the release, but also say they're deeply thankful for the assistance of Will Clarke at Altitude Films, which is selling the "In the Shadows" globally. Clarke would introduce the producers to Ben Metcalf at Metis Films, which is now physically handling the distribution, with former True Brit exec Kate Neville-Towle overseeing marketing.
"It's really nice because a lot of people really love the film, love Ramla and love what we're doing - so it's a bit like a community," said Sanderson. "We've got our team."
Led by "Top Boy" star Jasmine Jobson and directed by Anthony Wonke, "In the Shadow," tells the story of refugee Ali, who, without the knowledge of her strictly Muslim parents in London, secretly pursued boxing to become the first Somali-British professional boxing champion. It was at the boxing club where she trained that she met her future husband, Richard Moore, who converted to Islam. The film explores both Ali's drive to succeed despite the numerous obstacles in and out of the ring - a drive that helped her become the first boxer ever to represent Somalia at the the 2020 Olympic Games and the first-ever professional female boxing match in Saudi Arabia - and the love story between her and Moore as they navigate racial and cultural barriers.
For Magiday, there are parallels between the story behind "In the Shadows" and the making of it, culminating in the last-minute rescue.
"This film has been a battle from day one and and Ramla's story has been a battle from day one, so it's kind of in keeping," she said. "We've had to kind of fight the odds the whole time because we didn't get industry support for production. This was made by sheer will and determination, and some amazing backers who believed in the story. For us, it's such an important film because it is about hope. It's not just the normal boxing story - it's about being accepted by your your culture, by your family, by your community, and also finding love."
See the "In the Shadows" trailer below