British actor Naomi Watts, at the San Sebastián Film Festival to receive this year's prestigious Donostia Award, spoke about opportunities in the industry for women over 50. Talking a week after Sarah Paulson told Variety about the lack of film offers following her spellbinding portrait of Marcia Clark in "The People v. O.J. Simpson: American Crime Story," Watts said, "things have changed."
Watts recalled entering the industry late "by Hollywood standards," starring in David Lynch's lauded "Mulholland Drive" at 31 years old. "I was told at the beginning that I better get my skates on because it all finishes at the age of 40. And here we are today. I'm in my late 50s. Look at the Emmys last week [and] the number of women in strong categories over 50. That's heartening to see."
Popular on Variety
Nominees over the age of 50 included Rhea Seehorn ("Pluribus"), Jean Smart ("Hacks"), and Allison Janney ("The Diplomat").
"I do think things have changed," she added. "Women are consumers of film and TV, and their stories should be reflected. That narrative had to be shifted. And I am grateful to be a small part of that shift."
The actor is also at the Basque festival with Ben Shirinian's feature debut "The Housewife." The film, the Donostia Award Screening, stars Watts, Tye Sheridan, Luke Evans, Michael Imperioli and Lena Olin. Set in 1964 and based on a true story, the film tells the tale of a young journalist who tracks down a potential Nazi officer living secretly in New York and befriends the suspect's charming wife.
Prodded about the parallels between a film about World War II and the Holocaust and the ongoing wars today, specifically the ongoing war in Palestine, Watts said: "It's a very, very scary time what is going on in the world globally." "We must be vigilant, we must pay attention, and not let that happen again. Hopefully this film sparks a dialogue. We don't give answers; we hopefully send you away with questions of how did this happen and, who do you relate with in this story, and how we can avoid this happening ever again."
"We have to tell these stories; storytelling is important, particularly now," she reiterated, noting how she vows to continue supporting minorities and representation on screen. "I'm proud to be a part of the LGBTQ community. Minorities are being attacked right now, and it's frightful and unacceptable. My heart is with these communities, particularly my family. I'll do whatever I can to stick up for minorities."
As for playing an immigrant in the U.S. as an immigrant to the country herself, Watts said she "moved to America with hopes and dreams," all of which she has already "surpassed." "Hermine, the woman I play in this story, was there post-World War II, when things were much more sunny and bright. Her story was about trying to find a new place and erase the past, which she was able to do for a period of time."
"In terms of me, I have American children, I do love America, and what's going on today is complicated and certainly nerve-wracking, but I have faith that things will work out in time," she added about the U.S.'s current political climate.
Watts noted how the role was "very complicated," and she had a "huge amount of fear" when taking on the adaptation of the harrowing true story. "It was like nothing I ever played before: this duality of this woman who had done horrific things, heinous crimes, and yet blending into society as a normal person - very much a good citizen, a good wife, baking cookies, showing up to church. That duality and living with that secret was interesting to me as an actor."
"I am always looking to do new things even though I might have a repetitive theme in my work - grief and identity- things that are meaningful to me," she continued. "This character is like nothing I've ever played. I'm at an age now when some might joke I'm in my villain era, but this is an extreme one and not a joke. I felt compelled to play this story."
When asked about the similarities between her role in "Mulholland Drive" and "The Housewife," especially how both characters broach these notions of duality, Watts said both roles are "deeply psychological and confronting," but while she didn't particularly enjoy playing Hermine, she has nothing but wonderful memories of her time on set with the late Lynch, who died early last year.
"'Mulholland Drive' was nothing but fun," she said. "It was coming at a time in my life when I didn't have any breaks after years of struggle, so every day on set was just a wonder. Getting to learn how Lynch works and directs was truly wonderful. I'll never forget those days."
The actor called working with Lynch "an incredible break." "I had been working to get a film role for a good 10 years before that lucky break came. I was very much a journeyman actor, working wherever I could, but I had a lot of rejection. really was quite shut down, not bringing good energy into rooms I was asked to audition in. It took someone like David Lynch to see through the veneers I had created. We had a beautiful conversation, and he gave me the role of a lifetime."
"I'm forever indebted to David Lynch; he is in my heart forever," she went on. "This is a film that has remained in people's consciousness for decades, and I think it really launched me because every great filmmaker saw this film."
The San Sebastián Film Festival runs Sept. 18-26.