Michelle Rodriguez is sharing her memories of Hayden Panettiere after the "Scream 4" star died at age 36 on Sunday.
Rodriguez and Panettiere co-hosted the World Music Awards back in 2010. When asked what she remembers about Panettiere while walking the carpet at the 25th anniversary screening of "The Fast and the Furious," Rodriguez told Variety, "Her curious spirit and how happy and joyous she is, because that's her memory, right? I've got to tell you, man, I just can't stand how many young people are leaving us lately. It's disheartening, and it's making me think, 'What's going on?' It's not normal."
She added, "I don't want to speculate about anything, but it's weird. Just in general, the amount and the volume of it since 2010 to now, it's a lot."
Popular on Variety
Many celebrities shared tributes for Panettiere online after news broke of her death. Viola Davis, who starred alongside Panettiere in the 2016 drama film "Custody," shared a tribute on Instagram, writing, "I wish the world had more time with you because I had a burning curiosity about who you were becoming. I saw this beautiful Phoenix rising from the ashes. Your tests became your testimony, and your testimony became your legacy. You will be remembered. Rest well, Hayden. Sending healing prayers to your family, your daughter, and all who loved you. May they always speak your name."
Panettiere's good friend and "One Tree Hill" star Bethany Joy Lenz likewise posted a remembrance on social media, along with photos of them together throughout the years. She wrote, "I knew the wild little blonde. Was she nine? Ten? I was eighteen. She ran through the Screen Gem studio hallways at 222 E44th St. laughing and playing games in between blocking and camera rehearsals. Long, unruly curls trailing behind her. She knew her lines and everyone else's. Her intelligence was astonishing. She understood scenes and nuance and human struggle like no child I'd ever seen on camera. And she'd sit with you for a great conversation, then giggle and go play."
A cause of death has yet to be released. Panettiere's father told ABC News on Sunday night, "It is with profound sadness that we share the tragic passing of our beloved Hayden. She was an incredible light and a force of nature who brought immeasurable love and joy to all who knew her - and to the millions who watched her onscreen."