White House officials are defending U.S. President Donald Trump's ban of CNN, MS NOW and Politico, claiming that it does not violate the First Amendment.
A Tuesday court filing obtained by The New York Times alleges that the news outlets had breached standards of conduct, accusing them of "trafficking in verifiable falsehoods about national security and other issues, and publishing sensitive or classified information."
"Access to the White House is a privilege - not a right," the filing states, according to The New York Times. The documents also claim that the denial of access is a "preliminary matter" and the news organizations can contest the decision until Friday.
Popular on Variety
Trump announced the ban on Truth Social on Friday, writing that he was expelling the outlets from the White House "as a result of their constant 'reporting' FAKE NEWS." On Monday, CNN, MS Now and Politico released a joint statement saying that they planned to sue, alleging that the ban violated the First Amendment.
"This morning, we notified the government that we are filing a lawsuit today to protect our First Amendment rights and defend the principle that the government does not decide what the press reports or publishes," their statement said. "Without notice or process, the White House revoked our journalists' credentials because it objected to our reporting. Left unchallenged, this threatens press freedom and the public's right to independent journalism free from government interference."
An emergency hearing will be held on Wednesday regarding the outlets' request for a temporary court order reversing the ban. U.S. District Judge Timothy J. Kelly, who was appointed by Trump in 2017, will preside. Kelly previously ruled against Trump in 2018 when he similarly expelled CNN reporter Jim Acosta, whose credentials were restored when Kelly determined that Trump had not given him sufficient notice.
Trump's ban of CNN, MS NOW and Politico has sent shock waves through the media industry. In an unprecedented move, ABC News, CBS News, NBC News and Fox News have all suspended pool coverage of the president in solidarity with CNN.
"The public has a vital interest in receiving accurate, independent information about its government," the five networks said in a joint statement Monday. "No administration should restrict a news organization because it objects to its reporting."