Hits like "The Super Mario Galaxy Movie" and "Michael" helped lift Imax's second quarter earnings. During the three-month period ending in June, the big screen provider's revenues increased 12% to $102.8 million, while net income improved 30% to $15.9 million. Imax recorded adjusted earnings per share of 43 cents, a 65% improvement over the prior-year quarterly results.
Imax's global box office of $285 million marked the company's highest second quarter results since 2019 and increased 1% year-over-year, which it said was driven by 24% box office growth in international markets excluding China. The top grossing titles in Imax over the three month period included "Michael" ($69 million), "The Mandalorian & Grogu" ($42 million) and "The Super Mario Galaxy Movie" ($39 million).
But even as Imax touted its results, the company is already looking ahead to a monster third quarter, driven by the frenzy surrounding screenings of Christopher Nolan's "The Odyssey" on the company's screens. "The Odyssey" is the first film shot entirely with Imax cameras and Nolan's advocacy of the format has led to sell-outs as theaters have scrambled to keep up with demand. Imax was responsible for 20% of the film's global box office in its opening weekend, accounting for $52 million in sales. That's a record for the company. Imax also reports it has $60 million in pre-sales for future showtimes of "The Odyssey."
Popular on Variety
In a statement, Imax CEO Rich Gelfond hailed "The Odyssey" as "a transformational event for Imax" as well as "the purest and most complete expression yet of the power of our global platform."
"The Odyssey has the potential to impact our business in many ways that are clear - and many ways we can't yet predict, as its success on our platform reverberates across the creative community, and throughout the entertainment landscape," Gelfond added. "In the near-term, the film gives us excellent momentum as we enter the second half of the year, with a strong slate that culminates with 'Dune: Part Three,' which was also shot with Imax film cameras and will be presented in Imax 70mm film."
During the second quarter, Imax installed 38 new systems compared to 36 systems in the same quarter in 2025.