Netflix has released a trailer for "The Further Mis-Adventures of Cliff Booth," in which Brad Pitt reprises his Oscar-winning role as the stuntman first introduced in Quentin Tarantino's "Once Upon a Time in Hollywood." The film is set to premiere in Imax theaters on Nov. 25, before hitting the streamer Dec. 23.
Directed by David Fincher, the film sees the return of Cliff Booth" - "only this time it's 1977 and it's a very different Hollywood," as Netflix put it in the trailer announcement. The film takes place eight years after the events of "Once Upon a Time in Hollywood," when Booth has traded stunts for being a "studio fixer."
While Leonardo DiCaprio is not returning as Hollywood star Rick Dalton, Timothy Olyphant will reprise his original role of James Stacy. Scott Caan, Elizabeth Debicki, Yahya Abdul-Mateen II, Carla Gugino, Holt McCallany and JB Tadena will play new characters in the sequel.
Popular on Variety
The trailer opens with Booth causing chaos at the Beverly Cinema, which has been owned by Tarantino since 2007. Mud-wrestling, murder and car chases ensue. At one point, Debicki's character asks Booth about his work as Dalton's stunt double. "You worked with Rick Dalton for a number of years. What brought an end to your engagement?" she asks. "Oh, Rick got too fat for me to double him anymore," he replies.
In an August 2025 interview on "The Church of Tarantino" podcast, Tarantino got candid about why he wouldn't return to direct the film. "I love this script, but I'm still walking down the same ground I've already walked," he said. "It just kind of unenthused me. This last movie, I've got to not know what I'm doing again. I've got to be in uncharted territory." (The director has notably said that his 10th feature film will be his last; "Once Upon a Time in Hollywood" was his ninth.)
But that doesn't mean he isn't excited to see how Fincher directs it. "I think me and David Fincher are the two best directors," he continued. "So the idea that David Fincher actually wants to adapt my work, to me, shows a level of seriousness towards my work that I think needs to be taken into account."
Ceán Chaffin and Pitt produce. Erik Messerschmidt serves as the film's director of photography. The film was shot on location in Los Angeles.
Watch the trailer below.