A TikTok video that included Taylor Swift's song "August" posted four days ago to the account for Donald Trump's campaign has had the sound removed.
The caption on the now Taylor-less "Team Trump" TikTok video reads, "I'm sure @Taylor Swift is going to be super excited we used her song! #taylorswift #maga #august." The video shows Donald and Melania Trump standing on a balcony watching fireworks with the text, "Mood because it's August and Donald Trump is your president."
Fans noticed Friday evening that the Swift song, from her 2020 album "Folklore," was removed from the Trump TikTok. In the U.S. version of the TikTok app, a message on the video reads: "The copyright owner hasn't made this sound available in your country." One of the top comments Friday on the video was from a user who said: "TAYLOR REMOVING THE AUDIO QUEEEEEEN."
Popular on Variety
Variety has reached out to representatives for Swift and Trump for comment.
The @TeamTrump TikTok account, which has 14 million followers, was set up ahead of the 2024 U.S. presidential election. It has continued to post videos regularly since Trump was elected for a second term.
A Team Trump video that included Swift's song "Father Figure," posted Nov. 6, 2025, also has had the audio removed. However, one posted a day ago with a version of Swift's "Red" still has the audio track available as of this writing. And a video on the official White House TikTok account from last November still is soundtracked with Swift's "The Fate of Ophelia."
In September 2024, Trump posted "I HATE TAYLOR SWIFT!" on social media after the singer said she intended to vote for Kamala Harris for U.S. president. "I'm voting for @kamalaharris because she fights for the rights and causes I believe need a warrior to champion them," Swift wrote in part in an Instagram post.
A month prior to that, Trump had shared AI-generated images falsely claiming that Swift endorsed him for president, including one portraying her as Uncle Sam overlaid with a message that said "Taylor wants you to vote for Donald Trump." At the time, Trump suggested in an interview with Fox Business that he wasn't worried Swift would sue him over the fake images, saying they "were all made up by other people."